A preface to the first edition of Jane Eyre being unnecessary, I gave none.
This second edition demands a few words, both of acknowledgement and miscellaneous remark.
My thanks are due in three quarters. To the public for the indulgent ear it has inclined
to a plain tale with few pretensions. To the press for the fair field its honest suffrage
has opened to an obscure aspirant. To my publishers for the aid their tact, their energy,
their practical sense, and frank liberality have afforded to an unknown and un-recommended author.
The press and the public are vague personifications for me and I must thank them in vague terms.
But my publishers are definite so they are certain generous critics who have encouraged
me as only large-hearted and high-minded men know how to encourage a struggling stranger.
To them, i.e. to my publishers and select reviewers, I say cordially, gentlemen, I thank
you from my heart. Having thus acknowledged what I owe to those who have aided and approved
me, I turn to another class, a small one so far as I know, but not, therefore, to be overlooked.
I mean the timorous or carpian few who doubt the tendency of such books as Jane Eyre, in
whose eyes whatever is unusual is wrong, whose ears detect in each protest against bigotry,
that parent of crime and insult to piety, that region of God on earth. I would suggest
to such doubters certain obvious distinctions. I would remind them of simple truths. Conventionality
is not morality. Self-righteousness is not religion. To attack the first is not to assail
the last. To pluck the mask from the face of the Pharisee is not to lift an impious
hand to the crown of thorns. These things and deeds are diametrically opposed. They
are as distinct as advice from virtue. Men too often confound them. They should not be
confounded. Appearance should not be mistaken for truth. Narrow human doctrines that only
tend to elate and magnify a few should not be substituted for the world-redeeming creed
of Christ. There is, I repeat it, a difference, and it is good, and not a bad action, to mark
broadly and clearly the line of separation between them. The world may not like to see
these ideas dissevered, for it has been accustomed to blend them, finding it convenient to make
external show pass for sterling worth, to let whitewashed walls vouch for clean shrines.
It may hate him who declares to scrutinize and expose, to raise the gilding and show
base material under it, to penetrate the sepulcher and reveal carnal relics, but hate as it will,
it is indebted to him. Ahab did not like Micaiah, because he never prophesied good concerning him,
but evil. Probably he liked the sufferant son, Cheniah, better, yet Ahab have escaped a bloody
death had he but stopped his ears to flattery, and opened them to faithful counsel. There is
a man in our own days whose words are not framed to tickle delicate ears, who, to my thinking,
comes before the great ones of society, much as the son of Imla came before the throned kings of
Judah and Israel, and who speaks as deep, with a powerful, a prophet-like, a vital, as mean and
dauntless and as daring. Is a satirist of vanity fair admired in high places? I cannot tell. But
I think of some of those amongst whom he hurls the Greek fire of his sarcasm, and over whom he
flashes the leavened brand of his denunciation, where to take his warnings in time, they or their
seed might yet escape a fatal rimloth Gilead. Why have I alluded to this man? I have alluded to him,
reader, because I think I see in him an intellect profounder and more unique than his contemporaries
have yet recognized, because I regard him as the first social regenerator of the day, as the very
master of that working core who would restore to rectitude the warped system of things, because I
think no commentator on his writings has yet found the comparison that suits him, the terms which
rightly characterize his talent. They say he is like Fielding, they talk of his wit, humor, comic
powers. He resembles Fielding as an eagle does a vulture. Fielding could stoop on a carrion,
but Thackerley never does. His wit is bright, his humor is attractive, but both bear the same
relation to his serious genius that mere lambient sheet lightning playing under the edge of the
summer cloud does to the electric death-spark hid in its womb. Finally, I have alluded to Mr. Thackerley,
because to him, if he will accept the tribute of a total stranger, I have dedicated this second
edition of Jane Eyre, Courier-Belle, Dec. 21, 1847.
Note to the third edition. I avail myself of this opportunity, which a third edition of Jane Eyre
affords me, of again addressing a word to the public, to exclaim that my claim to the title of
novelist rests on this one work alone. If, therefore, the authorship of other works of
fiction has been attributed to me, an honor is awarded where it is not merited, and consequently
denied where it is justly due. This explanation will serve to rectify mistakes which have already
been made and to prevent future errors. Courier-Belle, April 13, 1848.
There was no possibility of taking a walk that day.
We had been wandering, indeed, in the leafless shrubbery an hour in the morning, but since dinner, Mrs. Reed, when there was no company dined early, the cold winter wind had brought with it clouds so somber and a rain so penetrating that further out-of-door exercise was now out of the question.
I was glad of it. I never liked long walks, especially on chilly afternoons.
Dreadful to me was the coming home in the raw twilight, with nipped fingers and toes and a heart saddened by the chitings of Bessie the nurse, and humbled by the consciousness of my physical infirmity to Eliza, John, and Georgina Reed.
The said Eliza, John, and Georgina were now clustered round their mamma in the drawing-room. She lay reclined on a sofa by the fireside, and with her darlings about her, for the time neither quarreling nor crying, looked perfectly happy.
Me, she had dispensed from joining the group, saying, she regretted to be under the necessity of keeping me at a distance, but that until she heard from Bessie, and could discover by her own observation, that I was endeavouring in good earnest to acquire a more sociable and childlike disposition, a more attractive and sprightly manner, something lighter, franker, more natural as it were, she must exclude me from the privileges intended for happy, contented little children.
What does Bessie say I have done? I asked.
Jane, I don't like cavalers or questioners. Besides, there is something truly forbidding in a child taking up her elders in that manner. Be seated somewhere, and until you can speak pleasantly, remain silent.
A breakfast-room adjoined the drawing-room. I slipped in there. It contained a book-case. I soon possessed myself of a volume, taking care that should be one stored with pictures. I mounted into the window-seat, gathering up my feet, I sat cross-legged, like a Turk, and, having drawn the red-morning curtain nearly close, I was shrined in double retirement.
Folds of scarlet drapery shed in my view to the right hand. To the left were the clear panes of glass, protecting, but not separating, from the dreary November day. At intervals, while turning over the leaves of my book, I studied the aspect of that winter afternoon.
Afar, it offered a pale blank of mist and cloud. Near, a scene of wet lawn and storm-beat shrub, with ceaseless rain, sweeping away wildly before a long lamentable blast.
I returned to my book, Bequick's History of Birds. The letter-press thereof I cared little for, speaking generally, and yet there were certain introductory pages that, child as I was, could not pass quite as blank.
There were those which, treat of the haunts of sea-fowl, of solitary rocks and promontories, by them only inhabited, of the coast of Norway, studded with isles from its southern extremity, the Lindnes or Neys, to the North Cape, where the northern ocean, in vast whirls, boils around the naked, melancholy isles of farless Thurl, and the Atlantic surge, pours in among the stormy Hebrides.
I studied the great shores of Lapland, Siberia, Spritzbergen, Novozembla, Iceland, Greenland, with the vast sweep of the Arctic zone and those forlorn regions of dreary space.
That reservoir of frost and snow, where firm fields of ice, the accumulation of centuries of winter, glazed in alpine heights above, surround the pole and concenter the multiple rigors of extreme cold.
Of these death-like realms, I formed an idea of my own, shadowy like all the half-comprehended notions that float dim through the children's brains, but strangely impressive.
The words in these introductory pages connected themselves with succeeding vignettes and gave significance to the rock standing up alone in the sea of billow and spray, to the broken boat stranded on the desolate coast, to the cold and ghastly moon casting through bars of clouds at a wreck just sinking.
I cannot tell what sentiment haunted the quite solitary churchyard, with its inscribed headstone, its gates, its two trees, its low horizon girdled by a broken wall, and its newly risen crescent attesting to the hour of evening-tude.
The two ships becalmed on a torpid sea I believed to be marine phantoms. The fiend pining down the thief's back behind him I passed over quickly. It was an object of terror.
So was the black-horned thing seated aloof on a rock, surveying the distant crowds of surrounding gallows.
Each picture told a story, mysterious often to my underdeveloped understanding and imperfect feelings, yet ever profoundly interesting, as interesting as the tales Bessie sometimes narrated on winter evenings, when she chanced to be in a good humor, and when having brought her ironing table to the nursery hearth, she allowed us to sit about it.
And while she got up, Mrs. Reed's lace frills, and crimped her nightcap borders, fed our eager attentions with passages of love and adventure, taken from old fairy tales and other ballads, or, as at a later period I discovered, from the pages of Pamela and Henry, Earl of Moreland.
With Bewick on my knee, I was then happy, happy at least in my way. I feared nothing but interruption, and that came too soon. The breakfast-room door was opened.
"'Bah! Madame Mope!' cried the voice of John Reed. Then he paused. He found the room apparently empty.
"'Where the dickens is she?' he continued. "'Lizzie! Georgie!' calling to his sisters.
"'Jone is not here. Tell Mama she has run out into the rain, bad animal.'
"'It is well I drew the curtain,' thought I, and I wished fervently he might not discover my hiding place. Nor would John Reed have found it out himself. He was not quick, either of vision or conception, but Eliza just put her head in at the door and said it once.
"'She's at the window seat, to be sure, Jack.'
"'And out I came immediately, for I trembled at the idea of being dragged forth by the said Jack.
"'What do you want?' I asked, with awkward diffidence.
"'Say, what do you want, Master Reed?' was the answer.
"'I want you to come here,' and seated himself in an armchair. He intimated by a gesture that I was to approach and stand before him.
"'John Reed was a schoolboy of fourteen years old. Four years older than I, for I was but ten.
"'Large and stout for his age with a dingy and unwholesome skin, thick liniments in a spacious visage, heavy limbs and large extremities.
"'He gorged himself habitually at table, which made him bilious and gave him a dim, bleared eye and flabby cheeks.
"'He ought now to have been at school, but his Mama had taken him home for a month or two on account of his delicate health.
"'Mr. Miles, the Master, affirmed that he would do very well if he had fewer cakes and sweetmeats sent to him from home.
"'But the Mother's heart turned from that opinion so harsh, and inclined rather to more the refined idea that John's sallowness was owing to over-application, and perhaps to pining after home.
"'John had not much affection for his mother and sisters, and an antipathy to me.
"'He bullied and punished me, not two or three times in a week, but once or twice a day.
"'But continually every nerve I had feared him, and every morsel of flesh in my bones shrank when he came near.
"'There were moments when I was bewildered by the terror he inspired, because I had no appeal whatever against either his menaces or his inflictions.
"'The servants did not like to offend their young Master by taking my part against him, and Mrs. Reed was blind and deaf on the subject.
"'She never saw him strike or heard him abuse me, though he did both now and then in her very presence, more frequently, however, behind her back.
"'Habitually obedient to John, I came to his chair.
"'He spent some three minutes in thrusting out his tongue at me as far as he could without damaging the roots.
"'I knew he would soon strike, and while I dreaded the blow I mused on the disgusting and ugly appearance of him who would presently deal it.
"'I wondered if he read that notion in my face, for, all at once without speaking, he struck, suddenly and strongly.
"'I tottered, and on regaining my equilibrium, retired back a step or two from his chair.
"'That was for your impudence in answering Mama a while since,' he said,
"'and for your sneaking way of getting behind curtains, and for the look you had in your eyes two minutes since, you rat!'
"'Accustomed to John Reed's abuse, I never had any idea of replying to it.
"'My care was how to endure the blow, which was certainly follow the insult.
"'What were you doing behind the curtain?' he asked.
"'I was reading. Show the book.'
"'I returned to the window and fetched it thence.
"'You have no business to take our books. You are a dependent, Mama says.
"'You have no money. Your father left you none.
"'You ought to beg not to live here with gentlemen's children like us and eat the same meals we do,
"'and wear the same clothes at our Mama's expense.
"'Now I'll teach you to rummage my bookshelves, for they are mine.
"'All the house belongs to me or will do in a few years.
"'Go and stand by the door out of the way of the mirrors in the windows.'
"'I did so, not at first aware of what was his intention.
"'But when I saw him lift and poise the book and stand to enact to hurl it,
"'I instinctively started aside with a cry of alarm.
"'Not soon enough, however, the volume was flung, it hit me, and I fell,
"'striking my head against the door and cutting it.
"'The cut bled, the pain was sharp.
"'My terror had passed its climax and other feelings succeeded.
"'Wicked, cruel boy,' I said.
"'You are like a murderer.
"'You are like a slave driver.
"'You are like the Roman emperors.'
"'I had read Goldsmith's history of Rome and had formed my opinion of Nero and Calgula and etc.
"'Also I had drawn parallels in silence which I never thought thus to have declared aloud.
"'What? What?' he cried.
"'Did she say that to me?
"'Do you hear her, Eliza and Georgina?
"'Won't I tell mama? But first!'
"'He ran headlong at me.
"'I felt him grasp my hair and my shoulder.
"'He had closed with a desperate thing.
"'I really saw him a tyrant, a murderer.
"'I felt a drop or two of blood from my head trickle down my neck
"'and was sensible of somewhat pungent suffering.
"'These sensations for the time predominated over fear,
"'and I received him in a frantic sort.
"'I don't very well know what I did with my hands,
"'but he called me, "'Rot! Rot!' and bellowed out loud.
"'Aid was near him. Eliza and Georgina had run for Mrs. Reed, who had gone upstairs.
"'She now came upon the scene, followed by Bessie and her maid Abbott.
"'We were parted and I heard the words,
"'Dear, dear, what a flurry to fly at Master John!'
"'Did anyone ever see such a picture of passion?'
"'Then Mrs. Reed subjoined,
"'Take her away to the Red Room and lock her in there.'
"'Four hands were immediately laid upon me and I was born upstairs.'
I resisted all the way, a new thing for me,
and a circumstance which greatly strengthened the bad opinion Bessie and Miss Abbott were
entertain of me. The fact is, I was a trifle beside myself, or rather out of myself, as
the French would say. I was conscious that a moment's mutiny had already rendered me liable
to strange penalties, and like any other rebel slave, I felt resolved in my desperation to go
all lengths. Hold her at arms, Miss Abbott, she's like a mad cat. For shame, for shame,
cried the lady's maid. What shocking conduct, Miss Eyre, to strike a young gentleman, your
benefactress's son, your young master. Master, how is he my master? Am I a servant? No, you
are less than a servant, for you do nothing for your keep. There, sit down and think over
your wickedness. They had got me by this time into the apartment indicated by Mrs. Reed,
and had thrust me upon a stool. My first impulse was to rise from it like a spring. Their two
pair of hands arrested me instantly.
"'If you don't sit still, you must be tied down,' said Bessie. Miss Abbott lend me your
garters, for she will break mine directly.' Miss Abbott turned to divest a stout leg of
the necessary ligature. This preparation for bonds, and the additional ignominy it inferred,
took a little of the excitement out of me. Don't take them off, I cried. I will not stir.
In guarantee whereof, I attached myself to the seat by my hands.
"'Mind you don't,' said Bessie. When she had ascertained that I was really subsiding, she
loosened her hold of me. Then she and Miss Abbott stood with folded arms, looking darkly
and doubtfully on my face, as incredulous of my sanity. She never did so before. At
last, said Bessie, turning to Abigail, "'But it was always in her,' was the reply. I've
told Mrs. often my opinion about the child, and Mrs. agrees with me. She's an underhanded
little thing. I never saw a girl of her age so much cover.' Bessie answered not, but air
long addressing me, she said, "'You ought to be aware, Miss, that you are under obligation
to Mrs. Reed. She keeps you. If she were to turn you out, you would have to go to the
poorhouse.' I had nothing to say to these words. They were not new to me. My very first
recollections of existence included hints of the same kind. This reproach of my dependence
had become a vague sing-song in my ear, very painful and crushing, but only half intelligible.
Miss Abbott joined in, "'And you ought to not think yourself an equal with the Mrs.
Reed and Master Reed, because Mrs. kindly allows you to be brought up with them. They
will have a great deal of money and you will have none. It is your place to be humble and
to try to make yourself agreeable to them.' "'What we tell you is for your own good,'
added Bessie in no harsh voice. "'You should try to be useful and pleasant. Then perhaps
you would have a home here. But if you become passionate and rude, Mrs. will send you away,
and I'm sure.' "'Besides,' said Miss Abbott, "'God will punish her. He might strike her
dead in the midst of her tantrums, and then where would she go? Come, Bessie, we will
leave her. I wouldn't have her heart for anything. Say your prayers, Miss Eyre, when you are
by yourself, for if you don't repent, something bad might be permitted to come down the chimney
and fetch you away.' They went, shutting the door and locking it behind them.
The Red Room was a square chamber, very seldom slept in. I might say never indeed, unless
when a chance influx of visitors at Gateshead Hall rendered it necessary to turn to account
all the accommodation it contained. Yet it was one of the largest and stateliest chambers
in the mansion. A bed supported on massive pillars of mahogany, hung with curtains of
deep red damask, stood out like a tabernacle in the center. The two large windows with
their blinds always drawn down were half shrouded in festoons and falls of similar drapery.
The carpet was red. The table at the foot of the bed was covered with a crimson cloth.
The walls were a soft fawn color with a blush of pink in it. The wardrobe, the toilet table,
the chairs were of darkly polished old mahogany. Out of these surrounding shades rose high
and glared white the piled up mattresses and pillows of the bed, spread with a snowy white
Marcel's counterpane. Scarcely less prominent was an ample cushioned easy chair near the
head of the bed, also white with a footstool before it, and looking, as I thought, like
a pale throne. This room was chill because it seldom had a fire. It was silent because
it was remote from the nursery and kitchen. Solemn because it was known to be so seldom
entered. The housemaid alone came here on Saturdays to wipe from the mirrors and the
furniture a week's quiet dust, and Mrs. Reed herself at far intervals visited it to review
the contents of a certain secret drawer in the wardrobe, where were stored divers' parchments,
her jeweled casket, and a miniature of her deceased husband, and in those last words
lies the secret of the red room, the spell which kept it so lonely in spite of its grandeur.
Mr. Reed had been dead nine years. It was in this chamber he breathed his last. Here
he lay in state, hence his coffin was borne by the undertaker's men, and since that day,
in a sense of dreary consecration, had guarded it from frequent intrusion. My seat, to which
and the bitter Miss Abbott had left me riveted, was a low ottoman near the marble chimney
piece. The bed rose before me. To my right hand there was a high dark wardrobe, with
subdued broken reflections varying the gloss of its panels. To my left were the muffled
windows. A great looking glass between them repeated the vacant majesty of the bed and
room. I was not quite sure whether they had locked the door, and when I dared move I got
up and went to see. Alas, yes, no jail was ever more secure. Returning, I had to cross
before the looking glass. My fascinated glance involuntarily explored the depth it revealed.
All looked colder and darker in that visionary hollow than in reality, and the strange little
figure there gazing at me, with a white face and arms speckled the gloom, and the glittering
eye of fear moving where all else was still, had the effect of a real spirit. I thought
it like one of those tiny phantoms, half fairy, half imp, in Bessie's evening stories represented
as coming out of a lone ferny dells in the moors, and appearing before the eyes of belated
travellers. I returned to my stool.
Superstition was with me at that moment, but it was not yet her hour for complete victory.
My blood was still warm. The mood of the revolted slave was still bracing me with its bitter
vigour. I had to stem a rapid rush of retrospective thought before I quailed the dismal present.
All John Reed's violent tyrannies and all his sister's proud indifference, all his mother's
aversion, all the servant's partiality, turned up in my disturbed mind like a dark deposit
in a turpid well. Why was I always suffering, always brow-beaten, always accused, forever
condemned? Why could I never please? Why is it useless to try and win anyone's favour?
Eliza, who was headstrong and selfish, was respected. Georgiana, who had a spoiled temper,
a very acrid spite, a capitious and insolent carriage, was universally indulged. Her beauty,
her pink cheeks, and golden curls seemed to give delight to all who looked at her and
to purchase indemnity for every fault. John, no one thwarted, much less punished. Though
he twisted the necks of pigeons, killed the little pea-chicks, set the dogs at the sheep,
stripped the hothouse vines of their fruit, and broke the buds of the choicest plants
in the conservatory. He called his mother old girl, too. Sometimes reviled her for her
dark skin similar to his own. Bluntly disregarded her wishes, not unfrequently tore and spoiled
her silk attire, and he was still her own darling. I dared commit no fault. I strove
to fulfil every duty and was turned naughty and tiresome, sullen and sneaking, from morning
till noon and from noon to night. My head still ached and bled with the blow in the
fall I had received. No one had reproved John for wantonly striking me, and because I had
turned against him to avert farther irrational violence, I was loaded with general approbium.
Unjust, unjust, said my reason, forced by the agonizing stimulus into precocious though
transitory power, and resolve equally wrought up, instigated some strange expedient to achieve
escape from the insupportable oppression, as running away, or if that could not be affected,
never eating or drinking more and letting myself die. What a consternation of soul was
mine that dreary afternoon! How all my brain was in a tumult, and all my heart in insurrection!
Yet, in what darkness, what dense ignorance, was the mental battle fought? I could not
answer the ceaseless inward question why. I thus suffered now. At the distance of how
many years, I see it clearly. I was at discord at Gateshead Hall. I was like nobody there.
I had nothing in harmony with Mrs. Reed or her children or her chosen vassalage. If they
did not love me, in fact, as little as I did love them, they were not bound to regard with
affection a thing that could not sympathize with one amongst them, a heterogeneous thing
opposed to them in temperament and capacity in propensities, a useless thing, incapable
of serving their interests or adding to their pleasure, a noxious thing, cherishing the
germs of indignation at their treatment, of contempt of their judgment. I know that had
I been a sanguine, brilliant, careless, exacting, handsome, romping child, though equally dependent
and friendless, Mrs. Reed would have endured my presence much more complacently. Her children
would have entertained me more of the cordiality of fellow feeling. The servants would have
been less prone to make me the scapegoat of the nursery. Daylight began to forsake the
red room. It was past four o'clock, and the beclouded afternoon was tending to a drear
twilight. I heard the rain still beating continuously on the staircase window, and the wind howling
in the grove behind the hall. I grew by degrees, cold as stone, and then my courage sank. My
habitual mood of humiliation, self-doubt, forlorn depression, fell damp on the embers
of my decaying ear. All said I was wicked, and perhaps I might be so. What thought I
had been but just conceiving of starving myself to death! That certainly was a crime. And
Was I fit to die, or was the vault under the chancel of Gateshead Church an inviting-born?
In such vault I had been told did Mr. Reed lie buried, and led by this thought to recall
his idea, I dwelt on it with gathering dread. I could not remember him, but I knew that
he was my own uncle, my mother's brother, that he had taken me, when I was a parentless
infant, to his house, and that in his last moments he had required a promise of Mrs.
Reed, that she would rear and maintain me as one of her own children. Mrs. Reed probably
considered that she had kept this promise, and so she had, I dare say, as well as her
nature would permit her. But how could she really like an interloper not of her race,
and unconnected with her, after her husband's death by any tie? It must have been most irksome
to find herself bound by a hard-rung pledge to stand in the stead of a parent to a strange
child she could not love, and to see an uncongenial alien permanently intruded on her own family
group.
A singular notion dawned upon me. I doubted not, never doubted, that if Mr. Reed had been
alive he would have treated me kindly. And now I sat looking at the white bed, the overshadowed
walls occasionally also turning a fascinated eye toward the gleaming mirror. I began to
recall what I had heard of dead men troubled in their graves, by the violation of their
last wishes revisited the earth to punish the perjured and avenged the oppressed, and
I thought Mr. Reed's spirit, harassed by the wrongs of his sister's child, might quit
its abode, whether in the church vault or in the unknown world of the departed, and rise
before me in this chamber. I wiped my tears and hushed my sobs, fearful lest any sign
of violent grief might waken a pre-natural voice to comfort me, or elicit from the gloom
some hallowed face bending over me with strange pity.
This idea, consolatory in theory, I felt would be terrible if realized. With all my might
I endeavored to stifle it. I endeavored to be firm. Shaking my hair from my eyes I lifted
my head and tried to look boldly around the dark room. At this moment a light gleamed
on the wall. Was it, I asked myself, a ray from the moon penetrating some aperture in
the blind? No, moonlight was still in this sturd. While I gazed it glided up to the ceiling
and quivered over my head. I can now conjecture readily that this streak of light was in all
likelihood a gleam from a lantern carried by someone across the lawn, but then, prepared
as my mind was for horror, shaken as my nerves were by agitation, I thought the swift darting
beam was a herald of some coming vision from another world. Oh, my heart beat thick. My
head grew hot. A sound filled my ears which I deemed the rushing of wings. Something seemed
near me. I was oppressed, suffocated. Endurance broke down. I rushed to the door and shook
desperate effort. Steps came running from the outer passage. The key turned. Bessie and Abbott
entered. Miss Eyre, are you ill? said Bessie. What a dreadful noise. It quite went through me,
exclaimed Abbott. Take me out. Let me go to the nursery, was my cry. What for are you hurt? Have
you seen something? Again demanded Bessie. Oh, I saw a light and I thought a ghost would come. I
had now got hold of Bessie's hand and she did not snatch it from me. She has screamed on purpose,
declared Abbott in some disgust. And what a scream! If she had been in great pain, one would have
excused it. But she only wanted to bring us all here. I know her naughty tricks. What is all this?
demanded another voice, prematurely. And Mrs. Reed came along the corridor, her cap flying wide,
her gown rustling stormily. Abbott, Bessie, I believe I gave orders that Jane Eyre should
be left in the Red Room till I came to her myself. Oh, Miss Jane screamed so loud, ma'am,
pleaded Bessie. Let her go, was the only answer. Loose Bessie's hand, child. You cannot succeed
in getting out by these means, be assured. I abhor artifice particularly in children.
It is my duty to show you that tricks will not answer. You will now stay here an hour longer,
and it is only on condition of perfect submission and stillness that I shall liberate you then.
Oh, aunt, have pity. Forgive me, I cannot endure it. Let me be punished some other way. I shall
be killed if silence. This violence is most repulsive. And so, no doubt, she felt it.
I was a precocious actress in her eyes. She sincerely looked on me as a compound of virulent
passions, mean spirit, and dangerous duplicity. Bessie and Abbott, having retreated, Mrs. Reed,
impatient of my now frantic anguish and wild sobs, abruptly thrust me back and locked me in without
farther parlay. I heard her sweeping away, and soon after she was gone, I suppose I had a species
of fit. Unconsciousness closed the scene.
The next thing I remember is waking up with a feeling as if I had had a frightful nightmare,
and seeing before me a terrible red glare crossed with thick black bars.
I heard voices, too, speaking with a hollow sound, and as if muffled by a rush of wind or water.
Agitation, uncertainty, and an all-predominating sense of terror confused my faculties.
Ere long, I became aware that someone was handling me, lifting me up and supporting me in a sitting
and that more tenderly than I had ever been raised or upheld before.
I rested my head against a pillow or an arm and felt easy.
In five minutes more the cloud of bewilderment dissolved.
I knew quite well that I was in my own bed and that the red glare was the nursery fire.
It was night, a candle burnt on the table.
Bessie stood at the bed foot with a basin in her hand,
and a gentleman sat in a chair near my pillow leaning over me.
I felt an inexpressible relief, a soothing conviction of protection and security when
I knew that there was a stranger in the room, an individual not belonging to Gateshead and
not related to Mrs. Reed.
Turning from Bessie, though her presence was far less obnoxious to me than that of Abbott,
for instance, would have been, I scrutinized the face of the gentleman.
I knew him.
It was Mr. Lloyd, an apothecary.
Sometimes called in by Mrs. Reed when the servants were ailing.
For herself and the children she employed a physician.
Well, who am I, he asked.
I pronounced his name, offering him at the same time my hand.
He took it smiling and saying, we shall do very well by and by.
Then he laid me down and addressing Bessie,
charged her to be very careful that I was not disturbed during the night.
Having given some further directions and intimates that he should call the next day,
he departed to my grief.
I felt so sheltered and befriended while he sat in the chair near my pillow,
and as he closed the door after him, all the room darkened and my heart again sank.
Inexpressible sadness weighed it down.
Do you feel as if you should sleep, Miss?
asked Bessie rather softly.
Scarcely dared I answer her,
for I feared the next sentence might be rough.
I will try.
Would you like to drink, or could you eat anything?
No, thank you, Bessie.
Then I think I shall go to bed, for it is past twelve o'clock.
But you may call me if you want anything in the night.
Wonderful civility, this.
It emboldened me to ask a question.
Bessie, what is the matter with me?
Am I ill?
You fell sick, I suppose, in the red room with crying.
You'll be better soon, no doubt.
Bessie went into the housemaid's apartment, which was near.
I heard her say,
Sarah, come and sleep with me in the nursery.
I daren't for my life be alone with that poor child to-night.
She might die.
It's such a strange thing she should have that fit.
I wonder if she saw anything.
Mrs. was rather too hard.
Sarah came back with her, they both went to bed.
They were whispering together for half an hour before they fell asleep.
I caught scraps of their conversation, from which I was able
only too distinctly to infer the main subject discussed.
Something passed her, all dressed in white and vanished.
A great black dog behind him, three loud raps on the chamber door,
a light in the churchyard just over his grave, etc.
At last both slept.
The fire and the candle went out.
For me, the watches of that long night passed in ghastly wakefulness,
strained by dread, such dread as children only can feel.
No severe or prolonged bodily illness followed this incident of the red room.
It only gave my nerves a shock, of which I feel the reverberation to this day.
Yes, Mrs. Reed, to you I owe some fearful pangs of mental suffering.
But I ought to forgive you, for you knew not what you did.
While rending my heartstrings you thought you were only uprooting my bad propensities.
Next day by noon I was up and dressed and sat wrapped in a shawl by the nursery hearth.
I felt physically weak and broken down.
But my worst ailment was an unutterable wretchedness of mind,
a wretchedness which kept drawing from me silent tears.
No sooner had I wiped one salt drop from my cheek than another followed.
Yet, I thought, I ought to have been happy.
For none of the Reeds were there.
They were all gone out in the carriage with their mamma.
Abbott, too, was sewing in another room, and Bessie,
as she moved hither and thither putting away toys and arranging drawers,
addressed to me every now and then a word of unwanted kindness.
This state of things should have been to me a paradise of peace,
accustomed, as I was, to a life of ceaseless reprimand and thankless fagging.
But, in fact, my wracked nerves were now in such a state that no calm could soothe
and no pleasure excite them agreeably.
Bessie had been down to the kitchen, and she brought up with her a tart on a certain
brightly painted china plate, whose bird of paradise nestling in a wreath of convivouli
and rose buds had been wont to stir in me a most enthusiastic sense of admiration,
and which plate I had often petitioned to be allowed to take in my hands
in order to examine it more closely, but had always hitherto been deemed
unworthy of such a privilege.
This precious vessel was now placed on my knee,
and I was cordially invited to eat the circlet of delicate pastry upon it.
Vain favor, coming, like most other favors long deferred and often wished for, too late.
I could not eat the tart, and the plumage of the bird,
the tints of the flowers, seemed strangely faded.
I put both plate and tart away.
Bessie asked if I would have a book.
The word book acted as a transient stimulus,
and I begged her to fetch Gulliver's travels from the library.
This book I had again and again perused with delight.
I considered it a narrative of facts, and discovered in it a vein of interest
deeper than what I found in fairy tales.
For as to the elves, having sought them in vain among foxglove leaves and bells,
under mushrooms, and beneath the ground ivy mantling old wall nooks,
I had at length made up my mind to the sad truth that they were all gone out of England
to some savage country where the woods were wilder and thicker, and the population more scant.
Whereas Lilliput and Brobdignog being, in my creed, solid parts of the earth's surface,
I doubted not that I might one day, by taking a long voyage, see with my own eyes the little
fields, houses, and trees, the diminutive people, the tiny cows, sheep, and birds of the One Realm,
and the cornfields forest high, the mighty mastiffs, the monster cats,
the tower-like men and women of the other.
Yet, when this cherished volume was now placed in my hand,
when I turned over its leaves and sought in its marvelous pictures the charm I had,
till now never failed to find, all was eerie and dreary.
The giants were gaunt goblins, the pygmies malevolent and fearful imps.
Gulliver, a most desolate wanderer in most dread and dangerous regions.
I closed the book, which I dared no longer peruse and put it on the table beside the untasted tart.
Bessie had now finished dusting and tidying the room, and having washed her hands,
she opened a certain little drawer full of splendid shreds of silk and satin,
and began making a new bonnet for Georgiana's doll.
Meantime, she sang. Her song was, In the days when we went gypsying a long time ago.
I had often heard the song before, and always with lively delight,
for Bessie had a sweet voice, at least I thought so.
But now, though her voice was still sweet, I found in its melody an indescribable sadness.
Sometimes, preoccupied with her work, she sang the refrain very slowly, very lingeringly.
A long time ago came out like the saddest cadence of a funeral hymn.
She passed into another ballad, this time a really doleful one.
My feet there soar and my limbs there weary. Long is the way and the mountains are wild.
Soon will the twilight close moonless and dreary over the path of the poor orphan child.
Why did they send me so far and so lonely, up where the moors spread and gray rocks are piled?
Men are hard-hearted and kind angels only watch o'er the steps of a poor orphan child.
Yet distant and soft the night breeze is blowing.
Clouds there are none and clear stars be mild. God in his mercy protection is showing,
comfort and hope to the poor orphan child. Even should I fall o'er the broken bridge passing
or stray in the marshes by false lights beguiled, still will my father with promise and blessing
take to his bosom the poor orphan child. There is a thought that for strength should avail me,
though both shelter and kindred despoiled. Heaven is a home and rest will not fail me.
God is a friend to the poor orphan child.
Come, Miss Jane, don't cry, said Bessie as she finished.
She might as well have said to the fire, don't burn. But how could she divine the
morbid suffering to which I was a prey? In the course of the morning Mr. Lloyd came again.
What? Already up? He said as he entered the nursery. Well, nurse, how is she?
Bessie answered that I was doing very well. Then she ought to look more cheerful.
Come here, Miss Jane. Your name is Jane, is it not? Yes, sir, Jane Eyre.
Well, you have been crying, Miss Jane Eyre. Can you tell me what about? Have you any pain?
No, sir. Oh, I dare say she is crying because she could not go out with the
Misses in the carriage, interposed Bessie. Surely not. Why, she is too old for such pettishness.
I thought so too, and my self-esteem being wounded by the false charge,
I answered promptly. I never cried for such a thing in my life. I hate going out in the carriage.
I cry because I am miserable. Oh, fie, Miss, said Bessie.
The good apothecary appeared a little puzzled. I was standing before him.
He fixed his eyes on me very steadily. His eyes were small and grey, not very bright,
but I dare say I should think them shrewd now. He had a hard-featured yet good-natured looking face.
Having considered me at leisure, he said,
What made you ill yesterday?
She had a fall, said Bessie, again putting in her word.
Fall? Why, that is like a baby again. Can't she manage to walk at her age?
She must be eight or nine years old.
I was knocked down, was the blunt explanation, jerked out of me by another pang of mortified
pride. But that did not make me ill, I added, while Mr. Lloyd helped himself to a pinch of snuff.
As he was returning the box to his waistcoat pocket,
a loud bell rang for the servant's dinner. He knew what it was.
That's for you, nurse, he said. You can go down. I'll give Miss Jane a lecture till you come back.
Bessie would rather have stayed, but she was obliged to go,
because punctuality at meals was rigidly enforced at Gateshead Hall.
The fall did not make you ill. What did, then? pursued Mr. Lloyd when Bessie was gone.
I was shut up in a room where there is a ghost till after dark.
I saw Mr. Lloyd smile and frown at the same time.
Ghosts? What, are you a baby after all? You are afraid of ghosts?
Of Mr. Reed's ghost I am. He died in that room and was laid out there.
Neither Bessie nor anyone else will go into it at night, if they can help it.
And it was cruel to shut me up alone without a candle, so cruel that I think I shall never forget it.
Nonsense! And is it that makes you so miserable? Are you afraid now in daylight?
No, but night will come again before long, and besides.
I am unhappy, very unhappy, for other things.
What other things? Can you tell me some of them?
How much I wish to reply fully to this question, how difficult it was to frame any answer.
Children can feel, but they cannot analyze their feelings.
And if the analysis is partially affected in thought,
they know not how to express the results of the process in words.
Fearful, however, of losing this first and only opportunity of relieving my grief by imparting it,
I, after a disturbed pause, contrived to frame a meager, though as far as it went, true response.
For one thing, I have no father or mother, brothers or sisters.
You have a kind aunt and cousins.
Again I paused, then bunglingly announced.
But John Reed knocked me down, and my aunt shut me up in the red room.
Mr. Lloyd a second time produced his snuff-box.
Don't you think Gateshead Hall a very beautiful house? he asked.
Are you not very thankful to have such a fine place to live at?
It is not my house, sir, and Abbott says I have less right to be here than a servant.
You can't be silly enough to wish to leave such a splendid place.
If I had anywhere else to go, I should be glad to leave it,
but I can never get away from Gateshead till I am a woman.
Perhaps you may, who knows?
Have you any relations besides Mrs. Reed?
I think not, sir. None belonging to your father?
I don't know. I asked Aunt Reed once, and she said possibly I might have some poor, lowly relations called air,
but she knew nothing about them.
If you had such, would you like to go to them?
I reflected. Poverty looks grim to grown people, still more so to children.
They have not much idea of industrious, working, respectable poverty.
They think of the word only as connected with ragged clothes, scanty food,
fireless grates, rude manners, and debasing vices. Poverty, for me, was synonymous with degradation.
No, I should not like to belong to poor people, was my reply.
Not even if they were kind to you?
I shook my head. I could not see how poor people had the means of being kind.
And then, to learn to speak like them, to adopt their manners, to be uneducated,
to grow up like one of the poor women I saw sometimes nursing their children
or washing their clothes at the cottage doors of the village of Gateshead?
No, I was not heroic enough to purchase liberty at the price of caste.
But are your relatives so very poor? Are they working people?
I cannot tell. Aunt Reed says if I have any, they must be a beggarly set.
I should not like to go a-begging.
Would you like to go to school?
Again I reflected. I scarcely knew what school was.
Bessie sometimes spoke of it as a place where young ladies sat in the stocks,
wore backboards, and were expected to be exceedingly genteel and precise.
John Reed hated his school and abused his master.
But John Reed's tastes were no rule for mine.
And if Bessie's accounts of school discipline, gathered from the young
ladies of a family where she had lived before coming to Gateshead, were somewhat appalling,
her details of certain accomplishments attained by these same young ladies were,
I thought, equally attractive.
She boasted of the beautiful paintings of landscapes and flowers by them executed,
of songs they could sing and pieces they could play,
of purses they could knit, of French books they could translate,
till my spirit was moved to emulation as I listened.
Besides, school would be a complete change.
It implied a long journey, an entire separation from Gateshead, an entrance into a new life.
I should indeed like to go to school, was the audible conclusion of my musings.
Well, well, who knows what may happen, said Mr. Lloyd as he got up.
The child ought to have a change of air and scene, he added, speaking to himself,
nerves not in a good state.
Bessie now returned. At the same moment the carriage was heard rolling up the gravel walk.
Is that your mistress, nurse? asked Mr. Lloyd. I should like to speak to her before I go.
Bessie invited him to walk into the breakfast room and led the way out.
In the interview which followed between him and Mrs. Reed, I presume, from after occurrences,
that the apothecary ventured to recommend my being sent to school, and the recommendation
was no doubt readily enough adopted, for as Abbott said in discussing the subject with Bessie
when both sat sewing in the nursery one night, after I was in bed, and, as they thought, asleep.
Mrs. was, she dared say, glad enough to get rid of such a tiresome, ill-conditioned child,
who always looked as if she were watching everybody and scheming plots underhand.
Abbott, I think, gave me credit for being a sort of infantile Guy Fawkes.
On that same occasion I learned for the first time from Miss Abbott's communications to Bessie
that my father had been a poor clergyman, that my mother had married him against the wishes of her
friends who considered the match beneath her, that my grandfather Reed was so irritated at
her disobedience he cut her off without a shilling, that after my mother and father had been married
a year, the latter caught the typhus fever while visiting among the poor of a large manufacturing
town where his curacy was situated and where that disease was then prevalent, that my mother
took the infection from him and both died within a month of each other. Bessie, when she heard
this narrative, sighed and said, Poor Miss Jane is to be pitied too, Abbott. Yes, responded Abbott,
if she were a nice pretty child, one might compassionate her forlornness,
but one really cannot care for such a little toad as that.
Not a great deal to be sure, agreed Bessie. At any rate, a beauty like Miss Georgiana would be more
moving in the same condition. Yes, I dote on Miss Georgiana, cried the fervent Abbott, little darling,
with her long curls and her blue eyes and such a sweet colour as she has, just as if she were painted.
Bessie, I could fancy a Welsh rabbit for supper.
So could I, with a roast onion. Come, we'll go down. They went.
IV. From my discourse with Mr. Lloyd, and from
the above-reported conference between Bessie and Abbott, I gathered enough hope to suffice
as a motive for wishing to get well. A change seemed near. I desired and waited it in silence.
It tarried, however. Days and weeks passed. I had regained my normal state of health,
but no new illusion was made to the subject over which I brooded. Mrs. Reed surveyed me
at times with a severe eye, but seldom addressed me. Since my illness she had drawn a more
marked line of separation than ever between me and her own children, pointing me a small
closet to sleep in by myself, condemning me to take my meals alone and pass all my time in the
nursery while my cousins were constantly in the drawing-room. Not a hint, however, did she drop
about sending me to school. Still I felt an instinctive certainty that she would not long
endure me under the same roof with her, for her glance, now more than ever, when turned on me,
expressed an insuperable and rooted aversion. Eliza and Georgiana, evidently acting according
to others, spoke to me as little as possible. John thrust his tongue in his cheek whenever
he saw me, and once attempted chastisement, but as I instantly turned against him, roused by the
same sentiment of deep ire and desperate revolt which had stirred my corruption before, he thought
it better to desist, and ran from me, tittering execrations, and bowing, I had burst his nose.
I had indeed levelled at that prominent feature as hard a blow as my knuckles could inflict,
and when I saw that either that or my look daunted him, I had the greatest inclination
to follow up my advantage to purpose, but he was already with his mamma. I heard him in a
blubbering tone commence the tale of how that nasty Jane Eyre had flown at him like a mad cat.
He was stopped rather harshly. Don't talk to me about her, John. I told you not to go near her.
She is not worthy of notice. I do not choose that either you or your sisters should associate with
her. Here, leaning over the banister, I cried out suddenly, and without at all deliberating
on my words, they are not fit to associate with me. Mrs. Reed was a rather stout woman,
but on hearing this strange and audacious declaration, she ran nimbly up the stair,
swept me like a whirlwind into the nursery, and crushing me down on the edge of my crib,
dared me in an emphatic voice to rise from that place or utter one syllable during the
remainder of the day. What would Uncle Reed say to you if he were alive was my scarcely voluntary
demand. I say scarcely voluntary, for it seemed as if my tongue pronounced words without my will
consenting to their utterance. Something spoke out of me over which I had no control.
What? said Mrs. Reed under her breath. Her usually cold, composed grey eye became troubled with a
hand from my arm, and gazed at me as if she really did not know whether I were child or fiend.
I was now in for it. My Uncle Reed is in heaven, and can see all you do and think, and so can
Papa and Mama. They know how you shut me up all day long, and how you wish me dead.
Mrs. Reed soon rallied her spirits. She shook me most soundly. She boxed both my ears,
and left me without a word. Bessie supplied the hiatus by a homily of an hour's length
in which she proved beyond a doubt that I was the most wicked and abandoned child ever reared under
a roof. I half believed her, for I felt indeed only bad feelings surging in my breast.
November, December, and half of January passed away. Christmas and the New Year had been
celebrating it at Gateshead with the usual festive cheer. Presents had been interchanged,
dinners and evening parties given. From every enjoyment I was, of course, excluded.
By a share of the gate, he consisted in witnessing the daily apparelling of Eliza and Georgiana,
and seeing them descend to the drawing-room dressed out in the thin muslin frocks and scarlet
sashes, with hair elaborately ring-lettered, and afterwards enlisting to the sound of the piano,
or the harp played below, to the passing to and fro of the butler and footman,
to the jingling of larsen china as refreshments were handed, to the broken hum of conversation
as the drawing-room door opened and closed. When tired of this occupation, I would retire
from the stair-head to the solitary and silent nursery. There, though somewhat sad, I was not
miserable. To speak truth, I had not the least wish to go into company, for in company I was
very rarely noticed, and if Bessie had been but kind and companionable, I should have deemed it
a treat to spend the evenings quietly with her instead of passing them under the formidable eye
of Mrs. Reid in a room full of ladies and gentlemen. But Bessie, as soon as she had dressed
her young ladies, used to take herself off to the lively regions of the kitchen and
housekeeper's room, generally bearing the candle along with her. I then sat with my doll on my knee
till the fire got low, glancing around occasionally to make sure that nothing worse than myself haunted
the shadowy room, and when the embers sank to a dull red, I undressed hastily, tugging at knots
and strings as I best might, and sought shelter from cold and darkness in my crib. To this crib,
I always took my doll. Human beings must love something, and in the dearth of worthier objects
of affection, I contrived to find a pleasure in loving and cherishing a faded graven image,
shabby as a miniature scarecrow. It puzzles me now to remember with what absurd sincerity I
doted on this little toy, half fancying it alive and capable of sensation. I could not sleep unless
it was folded in my nightgown, and when it lay there safe and warm, I was comparatively happy,
believing it to be happy likewise. Long did the hours seem while I waited the departure of the
company, and listened for the sound of Bessie's step on the stairs. Sometimes she would come up
in the interval to seek her thimble or her scissors, or perhaps to bring me something by way of supper,
a bun or a cheesecake. Then she would sit on the bed while I ate it, and when I had finished,
she would tuck the clothes round me, and twice she kissed me and said good night, Miss Jane.
When thus gentle, Bessie seemed to me the best, prettiest, kindest being in the world,
and I wished most intensely that she would always be so pleasant and amiable, and never push me
about or scold or task me unreasonably, as she was too often wont to do. Bessie Lee must, I think,
have been a girl of great natural capacity, for she was smart in all she did, and had a remarkable
knack of narrative, so at least I judge from the impression made on me by her nursery tales.
She was pretty, too, if my recollections of her face and person are correct.
I remember her as a slim young woman, with black hair, dark eyes, very nice features,
and good clear complexion. But she had a capricious and hasty temper,
and indifferent ideas of principle or justice. Still, such as she was,
I preferred her to anyone else at Gateshead Hall.
It was the 15th of January, about nine o'clock in the morning. Bessie was gone down to breakfast.
My cousins had not yet been summoned to their mamma. Eliza was putting on her bonnet and warm
garden coat to go and feed her poultry, an occupation of which she was fond, and not less
of selling the eggs to the housekeeper and hoarding up the money she thus obtained.
She had a turn for traffic and a marked propensity for saving, shown not only in the
vending of eggs and chickens, but also in driving hard bargains with the gardener about flower roots,
seeds and slips of plants, that functionary having orders from Mrs. Reed to buy of his young lady all
the products of her parterre she wished to sell, and Eliza would have sewed the hair off her head
if she could have made a handsome profit thereby. As to her money, she first secreted it in odd
corners, wrapped in a rag or an old curl paper, but some of these hoards having been discovered
by the housemaid, Eliza, fearful of one day losing her valued treasure, consented to entrust it to
her mother at a usurious rate of interest, fifty or sixty per cent, which interest she exacted
every quarter, keeping her accounts in a little book with anxious accuracy.
Georgiana sat on a high stool, dressing her hair at the glass, and into weaving her curls
with artificial flowers and faded feathers, of which she had found a store in a drawer in the
attic. I was making my bed, having received strict orders from Bessie to get it arranged
before she returned, for Bessie now frequently employed me as a sort of under-nursery maid
to tidy the room, dust the chairs, etc. Having spread the quilt and folded my night-dress,
I went to the window-seat to put in order some picture books of doll's-house furniture scattered
there, and abrupt command from Georgiana to let her play things alone, for the tiny chairs and
mirrors, the fairy plates and cups were her property, stop my proceedings. And then, for
lack of other occupation, I fell to breathing on the frost-flowers with which the window was
fretted, and thus clearing a space in the glass through which I might look out on the grounds,
where all was still and petrified under the influence of a hard frost.
From this window were visible the porter's lodge and the carriage road, and just as I dissolved so
much of the silver-white foliage veiling the panes as left room to look out, I saw the gates thrown
open, and a carriage roll through. I watched it ascending the drive with indifference.
Carriages often came to Gateshead, but none ever brought visitors in whom I was interested.
It stopped in front of the house. The doorbell rang loudly. The newcomer was admitted.
All this being nothing to me, my vacant attention soon found lively retraction
in the spectacle of a little hungry robin which came and chirruped on the twigs of the leafless
cherry-tree nailed against the wall near the casement. The remnants of my breakfast of bread
and milk stood on the table, and having crumbled a morsel of roll, I was tagging at the sash to put
out the crumbs on the windowsill when Bessie came running upstairs into the nursery.
Miss Jane, take off your pinafore. What are you doing there? Have you washed your hands
and face this morning? I gave another tug before I answered, for I wanted the bird to be secure
of its bread. The sash yielded. I scattered the crumbs, some on the stone sill, some on the
cherry-tree bough. Then, closing the window, I replied, No, Bessie, I have only just finished
dusting. Troublesome, careless child, what are you doing now? You look quite red as if you had been
about some mischief. What were you opening the window for? I was spared the trouble of answering,
Bessie seemed in too great a hurry to listen to explanations. She hauled me to the washstand,
inflicted a merciless but happily brief scrub on my face and hands with soap, water and a coarse
towel, disciplined my head with a bristly brush, denuded me of my pinafore, and then,
hurrying me to the top of the stairs, bid me go down directly, as I was wanted in the breakfast
room. I would have asked who wanted me. I would have demanded if Mrs. Reed was there, but Bessie
was already gone, and had closed the nursery door upon me. I slowly descended. For nearly
three months I had never been called to Mrs. Reed's presence. Restricted so long to the nursery,
the breakfast dining and drawing-rooms were become, for me, awful regions on which it dismayed me to
intrude. I now stood in the empty hall. Before me was the breakfast-room door, and I stopped,
intimidated and trembling. What a miserable little paltrune had fear engendered of unjust
punishment made of me in those days. I feared to return to the nursery, and feared to go forward
to the parlour. Ten minutes I stood in agitated hesitation. The vehement ringing of the breakfast
room bell decided me I must enter. Who could want me? I asked inwardly, as with both hands I turned
the stiff door handle, which for a second or two resisted my efforts. What should I see besides
Aunt Reed in the apartment, a man or woman? The handle turned, the door unclosed, and passing
through and cutting low I looked up at a black pillar. Such at least appeared to me at first sight
the straight, narrow, sable-clad shape standing erect on the rug. The grim face at the top was
like a carved mask placed above the shaft by way of capital. Mrs. Reed occupied her usual seat by
the fireside. She made a signal to me to approach. I did so, and she introduced me to the stony
stranger with the words, This is the little girl respecting whom I applied to you.
He, for it was a man, turned his head slowly towards where I stood, and having examined me
with the two inquisitive-looking grey eyes which twinkled under a pair of bushy brows,
said solemnly, and in a base voice, Her size is small. What is her age? Ten years. So much
was the doubtful answer, and he prolonged his scrutiny for some minutes. Presently he addressed
Your name, little girl? Jane Eyre, sir. In uttering these words I looked up. He seemed to me a tall
gentleman, but then I was very little. His features were large, and they and all the lines of his frame
were equally harsh and prim. Well, Jane Eyre, now are you a good child? Impossible to reply to this
in the affirmative. My little world held a contrary opinion. I was silent. Mrs. Reed answered for me
by an expressive shake of the head, adding soon, Perhaps the less said on that subject,
the better, Mr. Brocklehurst. Sorry, indeed, to hear it. She and I must have some talk.
And bending from the perpendicular, he installed his person in the armchair
opposite Mrs. Reed's. Come here, he said. I stepped across the rug. He placed me
square and straight before him. What a face he had, now that it was almost on a level with mine!
What a great nose, and what a mouth, and what large, prominent teeth!
No sight so sad as that of a naughty child, he began, especially a naughty little girl.
Do you know where the wicked go after death? They go to hell, was my ready and orthodox answer.
And what is hell, can you tell me that? A pit full of fire. And should you like to fall into
that pit and to be burning there for ever? No, sir. What must you do to avoid it?
I deliberated a moment. My answer, when it did come, was objectionable.
I must keep in good health and not die. How could you keep in good health? Children younger
than you die daily. I buried a little child of five years old only a day or two since.
A good little child, whose soul is now in heaven. It is to be feared the same could not be said
of you were you to be called hence. Not being in a condition to remove his doubt,
I only cast my eyes down on the two large feet planted on the rug, and sighed,
wishing myself far enough away. I hope that sigh is from the heart,
and that you repent of ever having been the occasion of discomfort to your excellent benefactress.
Benefactress, benefactress, said I inwardly. They all call Mrs. Reid my benefactress. If so,
benefactress is a disagreeable thing. Do you say your prayers night and morning?
continued my interrogator. Yes, sir. Do you read your Bible?
Sometimes. With pleasure. Are you fond of it? I like revelations, and the Book of Daniel,
and Genesis, and Samuel, and a little bit of Exodus, and some parts of Kings and Chronicles,
and Job and Jonah. And the Psalms? I hope you like them.
No, sir. No? Oh, shocking! I have a little boy younger than you, who knows six Psalms by heart.
And when you ask him which he would rather have, a gingerbread nut to eat,
or a verse of a Psalm to learn, he says, Oh, the verse of a Psalm! Angels sing Psalms, said he.
I wish to be a little angel here below. He then gets two nuts in recompense for his infant piety.
Psalms are not interesting, I remarked. That proves you have a wicked heart,
and you must pray to God to change it, to give you a new and clean one,
to take away your heart of stone and give you a heart of flesh.
I was about to propound a question, touching the manner in which that operation of changing
my heart was to be performed, when Mrs. Reid interposed, telling me to sit down.
She then proceeded to carry on the conversation herself.
Mr. Brocklehurst, I believe I intimated in the letter which I wrote to you three weeks ago
that this little girl has not quite the character and disposition I could wish.
Should you admit her into Lowood School, I should be glad if the superintendent and teachers were
requested to keep a strict eye on her, and, above all, to guard against her worst fault,
a tendency to deceit. I mention this in your hearing, Jane, that you may not attempt to
pose on Mr. Brocklehurst.
Well might I dread, well might I dislike Mrs. Reid, for it was her nature to wound me cruelly.
Never was I happy in her presence. However carefully I obeyed, however strenuously I strove
to please her, my efforts were still repulsed and repaid by such sentences as the above.
Now uttered before a stranger, the accusation cut me to the heart. I dimly perceived that she was
obliterating hope from the new place of existence which she destined me to enter.
I felt, though I could not have expressed the feeling, that she was sowing aversion
and unkindness along my future path. I saw myself transformed under Mr. Brocklehurst's
eye into an artful, noxious child, and what could I do to remedy the injury?
Nothing indeed, thought I, as I struggled to repress a sob and hastily wiped away some tears,
the impotent evidences of my anguish.
Deceit is indeed a sad fault in a child, said Mr. Brocklehurst. It is akin to falsehood,
and all liars will have their portion in the lake burning with fire and brimstone.
She shall, however, be watched, Mrs. Reid. I will speak to Miss Temple and the teachers.
I should wish her to be brought up in a manner suiting her prospects,
continued my benefactress, to be made useful, to be kept humble. As for the vacations,
she will, with your permission, spend them always at Lowood.
Your decisions are perfectly judicious, madam, returned Mr. Brocklehurst.
Humility is a Christian grace, and one peculiarly appropriate to the pupils of Lowood.
I, therefore, direct that special care shall be bestowed on its cultivation amongst them.
I have studied how best to mortify in them the worldly sentiment of pride,
and only the other day I had a pleasing proof of my success.
My second daughter, Augusta, went with her mamma to visit the school,
and on her return she exclaimed,
O dear papa, how quiet and plain all the girls at Lowood look,
with their hair combed behind their ears,
and their long pinafores, those little holland pockets outside their frocks.
They are almost like poor people's children.
And, said she, they looked at my dress and mamma's as if they had never seen a silk gown before.
This is the state of things I quite approve, returned Mrs. Reid.
Had I sought all England over,
I could scarcely have found a sister more exactly fitting a child like Jane Eyre.
Consistency, my dear Mr. Brocklehurst, I advocate consistency in all things.
Consistency, madam, is the first of Christian duties,
and it has been observed in every arrangement connected with the establishment of Lowood.
Plain fare, simple attire, unsophisticated accommodations,
hardy and active habits such as the order of the day in the house and its inhabitants.
Quite right, sir.
I may then depend upon this child being received as a pupil at Lowood,
and there being trained in conformity to her position and prospects.
Madam, you may.
She who shall be placed in that nursery of chosen plants,
and I trust she will show herself grateful for the inestimable privilege of her election.
I will send her then as soon as possible, Mr. Brocklehurst, for,
I assure you, I feel anxious to be relieved of a responsibility that was becoming too irksome.
No doubt, no doubt, madam.
And now I wish you good morning.
I shall return to Brocklehurst Hall in the course of a week or two.
My good friend the archdeacon will not permit me to leave him sooner.
I shall send Miss Temple notice that she is to expect a new girl,
so that there will be no difficulty about receiving her.
Good-bye.
Good-bye, Mr. Brocklehurst.
Remember me to Mrs. and Miss Brocklehurst,
and to Augusta and Theodore and Master Brofton Brocklehurst.
I will, madam.
Little girl, here is a book entitled The Child's Guide.
Read it with prayer, especially that part containing an account of the
awfully sudden death of Martha Gee, a naughty child addicted to falsehood and deceit.
With these words, Mr. Brocklehurst put into my hand a thin pamphlet,
sewn in a cover, and having wrung for his carriage, he departed.
Mrs. Reed and I were left alone.
Some minutes passed in silence.
She was sewing.
I was watching her.
Mrs. Reed might be at that time some six or seven and thirty.
She was a woman of robust frame, square-shouldered and strong-limbed,
not tall, and, though stout, not obese.
She had a somewhat large face, the under-jaw being much developed and very solid.
Her brow was low, her chin large and prominent, mouth and nose sufficiently regular.
Under her light eyebrows glimmered an eye devoid of roof.
Her skin was dark and opaque.
Her hair nearly flaxen.
Her constitution was sound as a bell.
Illness never came near her.
She was an exact, clever manager.
Her household and tenentry were thoroughly under her control.
Her children only at times defied her authority and laughed it to scorn.
She dressed well, and had presents and port calculated to set off handsome attire.
Sitting on a low stool a few yards from her armchair, I examined her figure.
I perused her features.
In my hand I held the tract containing the sudden death of the liar,
to which narrative my attention had been pointed as to an appropriate warning.
What had just passed, what Mrs. Reid had said concerning me to Mr. Brocklehurst,
the whole tenor of their conversation was recent, raw and stinging in my mind.
I had felt every word as acutely as I had heard it plainly,
and a passion of resentment fermented now within me.
Mrs. Reid looked up from her work, her eye settled on mine,
her fingers at the same time suspended their nimble movements.
Go out of the room, return to the nursery was her mandate.
My look or something else must have struck her as offensive,
for she spoke with extreme though suppressed irritation.
I got up, I went to the door, I came back again,
I walked to the window, across the room, and then close up to her.
Speak I must, I had been trodden on severely, and must turn, but how?
What strength had I to dart retaliation at my antagonist?
I gathered my energies and launched them in this blunt sentence.
I am not deceitful. If I were, I should say I loved you.
But I declare I do not love you.
I dislike you the worst of anybody in the world except John Reid.
And this book about the liar you may give to your girl Georgiana,
for it is she who tells lies and not I.
Mrs. Reid's hands still lay on her work inactive,
her eye of ice continued to dwell freezingly on mine.
What more have you to say? she asked,
rather in the tone in which a person might address an opponent of adult age,
than such as is you ordinarily used to a child.
That eye of hers, that voice, stirred every antipathy I had,
shaking from head to foot, thrilled with ungovernable excitement,
I continued, I am glad you are no relation of mine.
I will never call you aunt again as long as I live.
I will never come to see you when I am grown up.
And if anyone asks me how I liked you and how you treated me,
I will say the very thought of you makes me sick,
and that you treated me with miserable cruelty.
How dare you affirm that, Jane Eyre?
How dare I, Mrs. Reid? How dare I? Because it is the truth.
You think I have no feelings, and that I can do without one bit of love or kindness.
But I cannot live so, and you have no pity.
I shall remember how you thrust me back, roughly and violently thrust me back into the red room,
and locked me up there to my dying day, though I was in agony,
though I cried out while suffocating with distress, have mercy, have mercy, aunt Reid.
And that punishment you made me suffer because your wicked boy
struck me, knocked me down for nothing.
I will tell anybody who asks me questions this exact tale.
People think you are a good woman, but you are bad, hard-hearted.
You are deceitful.
Ere I had finished this reply, my soul began to expand, to exalt,
with the strangest sense of freedom, of triumph I had ever felt.
It seemed as if an invisible bond had burst,
and that I had struggled out into unhoped for liberty.
Not without cause was this sentiment. Mrs. Reid looked frightened.
Her work had slipped from her knee. She was lifting up her hands,
rocking herself to and fro, and even twisting her face as if she would cry.
Jane, you are under a mistake. What is the matter with you? Why do you tremble so violently?
Would you like to drink some water? No, Mrs. Reid.
Is there anything else you wish for, Jane? I assure you I desire to be your friend.
Not you. You told Mr. Brocklehurst I had a bad character, a deceitful disposition,
and I'll let everybody at Lowood know what you are and what you have done.
Jane, you don't understand these things. Children must be corrected for their faults.
Deceit is not my fault, I cried out in a savage high voice.
But you are passionate, Jane. That you must allow.
Now return to the nursery. There's a deer. And lie down a little.
I am not your dear. I cannot lie down.
Send me to school soon, Mrs. Reid, for I hate to live here.
I will indeed send her to school soon, murmured Mrs. Reid, sort of voce.
And gathering up her work, she abruptly quitted the apartment.
I was left there alone, winner of the field.
It was the hardest battle I had fought, and the first victory I had gained.
I stood a while on the rug, where Mr. Brocklehurst had stood, and I enjoyed my conqueror's solitude.
First I smiled to myself and felt elated, but this fierce pleasure subsided in me as fast as
did the accelerated throb of my pulses. A child cannot quarrel with its elders as I had done,
cannot give its furious feelings uncontrolled play as I had given mine,
without experiencing afterwards the pang of remorse and the chill of reaction.
A ridge of lighted heath, alive, glancing, devouring,
would have been a meat emblem of my mind when I accused and menaced Mrs. Reid.
The same ridge, black and blasted after the flames are dead,
would have represented as meatly my subsequent condition,
when a half-hour's silence and reflection had shown me the madness of my conduct,
and the dreariness of my hatred and hating position.
Something of vengeance I had tasted for the first time,
as aromatic wine it seemed on swallowing, warm and racy.
Its after-flavour, metallic and corroding, gave me a sensation as if I had been poisoned.
Willingly would I now have gone and asked Mrs. Reid's pardon,
but I knew, partly from experience and partly from instinct,
that was the way to make her repulse me with double scorn,
thereby re-exciting every turbulent impulse of my nature.
I would feign exercise some better faculty than that of fierce speaking,
feign fine nourishment for some less fiendish feeling than that of sombre indignation.
I took a book, some Arabian tales, I sat down in an endeavour to read.
I could make no sense of the subject.
My own thoughts swam always between me and the page I had usually found fascinating.
I opened the glass door in the breakfast room.
The shrubbery was quite still.
The black frost rained, unbroken by sun or breeze through the grounds.
I covered my head and arms with the skirt of my frock,
and went out to walk in a part of the plantation which was quite sequestered.
But I found no pleasure in the silent trees,
the falling fur cones, the congealed relics of autumn,
russet leaves swept by past winds and heaps and now stiffened together.
I leaned against a gate and looked into an empty field where no sheep were feeding,
where the short grass was nipped and blanched.
It was a very grey day, a most opaque sky.
Onding on snow, canopied all,
thence flakes fell at intervals which settled on the hard plain and on the hoary lee without melting.
I stood, a wretched child enough,
whispering to myself over and over again,
What shall I do? What shall I do?
All at once I heard a clear voice call,
Miss Jane, where are you? Come to lunch.
It was Bessie I knew well enough, but I did not stir.
Her light step came tripping down the path.
You naughty little thing, she said, why don't you come when you're called?
Bessie's presence, compared with the thoughts over which I had been brooding,
seemed cheerful, even though as usual she was somewhat cross.
The fact is, after my conflict with and victory over Mrs. Reid,
I was not disposed to care much for the nursery maid's transitory anger,
and I was disposed to bask in her youthful lightness of heart.
I just put my two arms round her and said, Come Bessie, don't scold.
The action was more frank and fearless than any I was habituated to indulge in.
Somehow it pleased her.
You're a strange little child, Miss Jane, she said, as she looked down at me,
a little roving solitary thing, and you're going to school, I suppose.
I nodded.
And won't you be sorry to leave poor Bessie?
What does Bessie care for me? She's always scolding me.
Because you're such a queer, frightened, shy little thing, you should be bolder.
What, to get more knocks?
Nonsense. But you are rather put upon, that's certain.
My mother said when she came down to see me last week,
she would not like a little one of her own to be in your place.
Now come in, I've got some good news for you.
I don't think you have, Bessie.
Child, what do you mean? What sorrowful eyes you fix on me.
Well, but Misses and the young ladies and Master John are going out to tea this afternoon,
and you shall have tea with me.
I'll ask Cook to bake you a little cake,
and then you shall help me to look over your drawers, for I am soon to pack your trunk.
Misses intends you to leave Gateshead in a day or two,
and you shall choose what toys you like to take with you.
Bessie, you must promise not to scold me any more till I go.
Well, I will. But mind you're a very good girl, and don't be afraid of me.
Don't start when I chance to speak rather sharply, it's so provoking.
I don't think I shall ever be afraid of you again, Bessie, because I've gotten used to you,
and I shall soon have another set of people to dread.
If you dread them, they'll dislike you.
As you do, Bessie, I doubt dislike you, Miss.
I believe I'm funner of you than of all the others.
You don't show it, you sharp little thing.
You've got quite a new way of talking.
What makes you so venturesome and hardy?
Well, I shall soon be away from you, and besides,
I was going to say something about what had passed between me and Mrs. Reed,
but on second thoughts I considered it better to remain silent on that head.
And so you're glad to leave me?
Not at all, Bessie, indeed. Just now I'm rather sorry.
Just now? And rather? How coolly my little lady says it.
And I say now, if I were to ask you for a kiss, you wouldn't give it me.
You'd say you'd rather not.
I'll kiss you and welcome. Bed your head down.
Bessie stooped. We mutually embraced, and I followed her into the house quite comforted.
That afternoon lapsed in peace and harmony, and in the evening Bessie told me some of her
most enchanting stories, and sang me some of her sweetest songs.
Even for me, life had its gleams of sunshine.
V.
Five o'clock had hardly struck on the morning of the nineteenth of January, when Bessie
brought a candle into my closet and found me already up and nearly dressed.
I had risen half an hour before her entrance and had washed my face and put on my clothes
by the light of a half-moon just setting, whose rays streamed through the narrow window
near my crib.
I was to leave Gateshead that day by a coach which passed the lodge gates at six a.m.
Bessie was the only person yet risen.
She had lit a fire in the nursery, where she now proceeded to make my breakfast.
Few children can eat when excited with the thoughts of a journey, nor could I.
Bessie, having pressed me in vain to take a few spoonfuls of the boiled milk and bread
she had prepared for me, wrapped up some biscuits in a paper and put them into my bag.
Then she helped me own with my police and bonnet, and wrapping herself in a shawl, she
and I left the nursery.
As we passed Mrs. Reed's bedroom, she said,
Will you go in and bid Mrs. good-bye?
No, Bessie, she came to my crib last night when you were gone down to supper, and said
I need not disturb her in the morning, or my cousins either, and she told me to remember
that she had always been my best friend and to speak of her and be grateful to her accordingly.
What did you say, Miss?
Nothing, I covered my face with the bed-clothes and turned from her to the wall.
That was wrong, Miss Jane.
It was quite right, Bessie.
Your missus has not been my friend.
She has been my foe.
Oh, Miss Jane, don't say so.
Good-bye to Gateshead, cried I, as we passed through the hall and went out at the front
door.
The moon was set, and it was very dark.
Bessie carried a lantern whose light glanced on wet steps and gravel roads soddened by
a recent thaw.
Raw and chill was the winter morning.
My teeth chattered as I hastened down the drive.
There was a light in the porter's lodge.
When we reached it, we found the porter's wife just kindling her fire.
My trunk, which had been carried down the evening before, stood corded at the door.
It wanted but a few minutes of six, and shortly after that hour had struck, the distant roll
of wheels announced the coming coach.
I went to the door and watched its lamps approach rapidly through the gloom.
Is she going by herself? asked the porter's wife.
Yes.
And how far is it?
Fifty miles.
What a long way!
I wonder Mrs. Reed is not afraid to trust her so far alone.
The coach drew up.
There it was at the gates with its four horses and its top laden with passengers.
The guard and coachman loudly urged haste.
My trunk was hoisted up.
I was taken from Bessie's neck, to which I clung with kisses.
Be sure and take good care of her, cried she to the guard as he lifted me to the inside.
Aye, aye, was the answer.
The door was slapped too.
A voice exclaimed, All right, and on we drove.
Thus was I severed from Bessie and Gateshead, thus whirled away to unknown and, as I then
deemed, remote and mysterious regions.
I remember but little of the journey.
I only know that the day seemed to me of a preternatural length, and that we appeared
to travel over hundreds of miles of road.
We passed through several towns, and in one, a very large one, the coach stopped.
The horses were taken out, and the passengers alighted to dine.
I was carried into an inn where the guard wanted me to have some dinner, but as I had
no appetite, he left me in an immense room with a fireplace at each end, a chandelier
pendant from the ceiling, and a little red gallery high up against the wall filled with
musical instruments.
Here I walked about for a long time, feeling very strange, and mortally apprehensive of
someone coming in and kidnapping me, for I believed in kidnappers, their exploits having
frequently figured in Bessie's fireside chronicles.
At last the guard returned.
Once more I was stowed away in the coach.
My protector mounted his own seat, sounded his hollow horn, and away we rattled over
the stony street of El.
The afternoon came on wet and somewhat misty.
As it waned into dusk, I began to feel that we were getting very far indeed from Gateshead.
We ceased to pass through towns.
The country changed.
Great gray hills heaved up round the horizon.
As twilight deepened, we descended a valley, dark with wood, and long after night had overclouded
the prospect, I heard a wild wind rushing amongst trees.
Lulled by the sound, I at last dropped asleep.
I had not long slumbered when the sudden cessation of motion awoke me.
The coach door was open, and a person like a servant was standing at it.
I saw her face in dress by the light of the lamps.
Is there a little girl called Jane Eyre here?
She asked.
I answered yes, and was then lifted out.
My trunk was handed down, and the coach instantly drove away.
I was stiff with long sitting, and bewildered with the noise and motion of the coach.
Gathering my faculties, I looked about me.
Rain, wind, and darkness fill the air.
Nevertheless, I dimly discerned a wall before me, and a door open in it.
Through this door I passed with my new guide.
She shut and locked it behind her.
There was now visible a house or houses, for the building spread far, with many windows,
and lights burning in some.
We went up a broad pebbly path, splashing wet, and were admitted at a door.
Then the servant led me through a passage into a room with a fire, where she left me
alone.
I stood and warmed my numbed fingers over the blaze.
Then I looked round.
There was no candle, but the uncertain light from the hearth showed, by intervals, papered
walls, carpet, curtains, shining mahogany furniture.
It was a parlor, not so spacious or splendid as the drawing room at Gateshead, but comfortable
enough.
I was puzzling to make out the subject of a picture on the wall, when the door opened,
and an individual carrying a light entered.
Another followed close behind.
The first was a tall lady with dark hair, dark eyes, and a pale and large forehead.
Her figure was partly enveloped in a shawl, her countenance was grave, her bearing erect.
The child is very young to be sent alone, said she, putting her candle down on the table.
She considered me attentively for a minute or two, then further added,
She had better be put to bed soon, she looks tired.
Are you tired? she asked, placing her hand on my shoulder.
A little, ma'am.
And hungry too, no doubt.
Let her have some supper before she goes to bed, Miss Miller.
Is this the first time you have left your parents to come to school, my little girl?
I explained to her that I had no parents.
She inquired how long they had been dead, then how old I was, what was my name, whether
I could read, write, and sew a little.
Then she touched my cheek gently with her forefinger, and saying, she hoped I should
be a good child, dismissed me along with Miss Miller.
The lady I had left might be about twenty-nine.
The one who went with me appeared some years younger.
The first impressed me by her voice, look, and air.
Miss Miller was more ordinary, ruddy in complexion, though of a careworn countenance, hurried
in gait and action, like one who had always a multiplicity of tasks on hand.
She looked, indeed, what I afterwards found she really was, an underteacher.
Led by her, I passed from compartment to compartment, from passage to passage, of a large and irregular
building, till, emerging from the total and somewhat dreary silence pervading that portion
of the house we had traversed, we came upon the hum of many voices, and presently entered
a wide, long room, with great deal-tables, two at each end, on each of which burnt a
pair of candles, and seated all round on benches a congregation of girls of every age from
nine or ten to twenty.
Seen by the dim light of the dips, their number to me appeared countless, though not in reality
exceeding eighty.
They were uniformly dressed in brown-stuff frocks of quaint fashion, and long holland
pinafores.
It was the hour of study.
They were engaged in conning over their to-morrow's task, and the hum I had heard was the combined
result of their whispered repetitions.
Miss Miller signed to me to sit on a bench near the door.
Then, walking up to the top of the long room, she cried out,
Monitors, collect the lesson books and put them away.
Four tall girls arose from different tables, and going round, gathered the books and removed
them.
Miss Miller again gave the word of command.
Monitors, fetch the supper-trays.
The tall girls went out and returned presently, each bearing a tray, with portions of something
I knew not what arranged thereon, and a pitcher of water and mug in the middle of each tray.
The portions were handed round.
Those who liked took a draught of the water, the mug being common to all.
When it came to my turn, I drank, for I was thirsty, but did not touch the food, excitement
and fatigue rendering me incapable of eating.
I now saw, however, that it was a thin oaten cake shaved into fragments.
The meal over prayers were read by Miss Miller, and the classes filed off, two and two, upstairs.
Overpowered by this time with weariness, I scarcely noticed what sort of a place the
bedroom was, except that, like the schoolroom, I saw it was very long.
Tonight I was to be Miss Miller's bedfellow.
She helped me to undress.
When laid down, I glanced at the long rows of beds, each of which was quickly filled
with two occupants.
In ten minutes the single light was extinguished, and amidst silence and complete darkness,
I fell asleep.
The night passed rapidly.
I was too tired even to dream.
I only once awoke to hear the wind rave in furious gusts, and the rain fall in torrents,
and to be sensible that Miss Miller had taken her place by my side.
When I again unclosed my eyes, a loud bell was ringing.
The girls were up and dressing.
Day had not yet begun to dawn, and a rushlight or two burned in the room.
I too rose reluctantly.
It was bitter cold, and I dressed as well as I could for shivering, and washed when
there was a basin at Liberty, which did not occur soon, as there was but one basin to
six girls on the stands down the middle of the room.
Again the bell rang, all formed in file, two and two, and in that order descended the stairs
and entered the cold and dimly lit schoolroom.
Here prayers were read by Miss Miller.
Afterwards she called out, Form Classes.
A great tumult succeeded for some minutes, during which Miss Miller repeatedly exclaimed,
Silence! and Order!
When it subsided, I saw them all drawn up in four semicircles before four chairs, placed
at the four tables.
All held books in their hands, and a great book, like a Bible, lay on each table before
the vacant seat.
A pause of some seconds succeeded, filled up by the low, vague hum of numbers.
Miss Miller walked from class to class, hushing this indefinite sound.
A distant bell tinkled.
Immediately three ladies entered the room, each walked to a table and took her seat.
Miss Miller assumed the fourth vacant chair, which was that nearest the door, and around
which the smallest of the children were assembled.
To this inferior class I was called, and placed at the bottom of it.
Business now began.
The day's collect was repeated.
Then certain texts of scripture were said, and to these succeeded a protracted reading
of chapters in the Bible, which lasted an hour.
By the time that exercise was terminated, day had fully dawned.
The indefatigable bell now sounded for the fourth time.
The classes were marshalled and marched into another room to breakfast.
How glad I was to behold a prospect of getting something to eat!
I was now nearly sick from inanition, having taken so little the day before.
The refectory was a great, low-sealed, gloomy room, on two long tables smoked basins of
something hot, which, however, to my dismay, sent forth an odor far from inviting.
I saw a universal manifestation of discontent when the fumes of the repast met the nostrils
of those destined to swallow it.
From the van of the procession, the tall girls of the first class rose the whispered words,
Disgusting!
The porridge is burnt again.
Silence! ejaculated a voice.
Not that of Miss Miller, but one of the upper teachers, a little and dark personage, smartly
dressed, but of somewhat morose aspect, who installed herself at the top of one table,
while a more buxom lady presided at the other.
I looked in vain for her I had first seen the night before.
She was not visible.
Miss Miller occupied the foot of the table where I sat, and a strange, foreign-looking
elderly lady, the French teacher, as I afterwards found, took the corresponding seat at the
other board.
A long grace was said, and a hymn sung.
Then a servant brought in some tea for the teachers, and the meal began.
Ravenous, and now very faint, I devoured a spoonful or two of my portion without thinking
of its taste.
But the first edge of hunger blunted.
I perceived that I had got in hand a nauseous mess.
Burnt porridge is almost as bad as rotten potatoes.
Famine itself soon sickens over it.
The spoons were moved slowly.
I saw each girl taste her food and try to swallow it, but in most cases the effort was
soon relinquished.
Breakfast was over, and none had breakfasted.
Thanks being returned for what we had not got, and a second hymn chanted, the refectory
was evacuated for the schoolroom.
I was one of the last to go out, and in passing the tables I saw one teacher take a basin
of the porridge and taste it.
She looked at the others, all their countenances expressed displeasure, and one of them, the
stout one, whispered,
Abominable stuff!
How shameful!
A quarter of an hour passed before lessons again began, during which the schoolroom was
in a glorious tumult.
For that space of time it seemed to be permitted to talk loud and more freely, and they used
their privilege.
The whole conversation ran on the breakfast, which one and all abused roundly.
Poor things!
It was the sole consolation they had.
Miss Miller was now the only teacher in the room.
A group of great girls standing about her spoke with serious and sullen gestures.
I heard the name of Mr. Brocklehurst pronounced by some lips, at which Miss Miller shook her
head disapprovingly, but she made no great effort to cheek the general wrath, doubtless
she shared in it.
A clock in the schoolroom struck nine.
Miss Miller left her circle, and standing in the middle of the room cried,
Silence!
To your seats!
Discipline prevailed.
In five minutes the confused throng was resolved into order, and comparative silence quelled
the babble clamor of tongues.
The upper teachers now punctually resumed their posts, but still all seemed to wait.
Ranged on benches down the sides of the room, the eighty girls sat motionless and erect.
Acquaint assemblage, they appeared, all with plain locks combed from their faces, not a
girl visible.
In brown dresses, made high and surrounded by a narrow tucker about the throat, with
little pockets of holland, shaped something like a highlander's purse, tied in front of
their frocks, and destined to serve the purpose of a work bag, all too wearing woollen stockings
and country-made shoes, fastened with brass buckles.
Above twenty of those clad in this costume were full-grown girls, or rather young women.
It suited them ill, and gave an air of oddity even to the prettiest.
I was still looking at them, and also at intervals examining the teachers, none of whom precisely
pleased me, for the stout one was a little coarse, the dark one not a little fierce,
the foreigner harsh and grotesque, and Miss Miller, poor thing, looked purple, weather-beaten,
and overworked, when, as my eye wandered from face to face, the whole school rose simultaneously,
as if moved by a common spring.
What was the matter?
I had heard no order given.
I was puzzled.
Ere I had gathered my wits, the classes were again seated, but as all eyes now turned to
one point, mine followed the general direction, and encountered the personage who had received
me last night.
She stood at the bottom of the long room, on the hearth, for there was a fire at each
end.
She surveyed the two rows of girls silently and gravely.
Miss Miller approaching seemed to ask her a question, and having received her answer,
went back to her place, and said aloud,
Monitor of the first class, fetch the globes.
While the direction was being executed, the lady consulted moved slowly up the room.
I suppose I have a considerable organ of veneration, for I retain yet the sense of admiring awe
with which my eyes traced her steps.
Seen now in broad daylight, she looked tall, fair, and shapely, brown eyes with a benignant
light in their iris, and a fine penciling of long lashes round, relieved the whiteness
of her large front.
On each of her temples her hair, of a very dark brown, was clustered in round curls,
according to the fashion of those times, when neither smooth bands nor long ringlets were
in vogue.
Her dress, also in the mode of the day, was of purple cloth, relieved by a sort of Spanish
trimming of black velvet.
A gold watch, watches were not so common then as now, shone at her girdle.
Let the reader add, to complete the picture, refined features, a complexion, if pale, clear,
and a stately air and carriage, and he will have, at least, as clearly as words can give
it, a correct idea of the exterior of Miss Temple, Maria Temple, as I afterwards saw
the name written in a prayer book entrusted to me to carry to church.
The superintendent of Lowood, for such was this lady, having taken her seat before a
pair of globes placed on one of the tables, summoned the first class round her, and commenced
giving a lesson on geography.
The lower classes were called by the teachers.
Repetitions in history, grammar, etc. went on for an hour.
Writing and arithmetic succeeded, and music lessons were given by Miss Temple to some
of the elder girls.
The duration of each lesson was measured by the clock, which at last struck twelve.
The superintendent rose.
I have a word to address to the pupils, said she.
The tumult of cessation from lessons was already breaking forth, but it sank at her voice.
She went on.
You had this morning a breakfast which you could not eat.
You must be hungry.
I have ordered that a lunch of bread and cheese shall be served to all.
The teachers looked at her with a sort of surprise.
It is to be done on my responsibility, she added, in an explanatory tone to them, and
immediately afterwards left the room.
The bread and cheese was presently brought in and distributed to the high delight and
refreshment of the whole school.
The order was now given to the garden.
Each put on a coarse straw bonnet with strings of colored calico and a cloak of gray frieze.
I was similarly equipped, and following the stream I made my way into the open air.
The garden was a wide enclosure, surrounded with walls so high as to exclude every glimpse
of prospect.
A covered veranda ran down one side, and broad walks bordered a middle space divided in discourse
of little beds.
These beds were assigned as gardens for the pupils to cultivate, and each bed had an owner.
When full of flowers they would doubtless look pretty, but now, at the latter end of
January, all was wintry blight and brown decay.
I shuddered as I stood and looked round me.
It was an inclement day for outdoor exercise, not positively rainy, but darkened by a drizzling
yellow fog, all underfoot was still soaking wet with the floods of yesterday.
The stronger among the girls ran about and engaged in active games, but sundry pale and
thin ones herded together for shelter and warmth in the veranda, and amongst these,
as the dense mist penetrated to their shivering frames, I heard frequently the sound of a
hollow cough.
As yet I had spoken to no one, nor did anybody seem to take notice of me.
I stood lonely enough, but to that feeling of isolation I was accustomed.
It did not oppress me much.
I leant against a pillar of the veranda, drew my gray mantle close about me, and, trying
to forget the cold which nipped me without, and the unsatisfied hunger which gnawed me
within, delivered myself up to the employment of watching and thinking.
My reflections were too undefined and fragmentary to merit record.
I hardly yet knew where I was.
Gateshead and my past life seemed floated away to an immeasurable distance.
The present was vague and strange, and of the future I could form no conjecture.
I looked round the convent-like garden, and then up at the house.
A large building, half of which seemed gray and old, the other half quite new.
The new part, containing the schoolroom and dormitory, was lit by mullioned and lattice
windows which gave it a church-like aspect.
A stone tablet over the door bore this inscription.
Lowood Institution.
This portion was rebuilt A.D. blank by Naomi Brocklehurst of Brocklehurst Hall in this county.
Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works and glorify your Father
which is in heaven.
St. Matthew, verse 16.
I read these words over and over again.
I felt that an explanation belonged to them, and was unable fully to penetrate their import.
I was still pondering the signification of Institution, and endeavoring to make out a
connection between the first words and the verse of Scripture, when the sound of a cough
close behind me made me turn my head.
I saw a girl sitting on a stone bench near.
She was bent over a book, on the perusal of which she seemed intent.
From where I stood I could see the title.
It was Rassilus, a name that struck me as strange and consequently attractive.
In turning a leaf she happened to look up, and I said to her directly,
Is your book interesting?
I had already formed the intention of asking her to lend it to me some day.
I like it, she answered, after a pause of a second or two, during which she examined me.
What is it about?
I continued.
I hardly know where I found the hardyhood thus to open a conversation with a stranger.
The step was contrary to my nature and habits, but I think her occupation touched a chord
of sympathy somewhere.
For I too liked reading, though of a frivolous and childish kind.
I could not digest or comprehend the serious or substantial.
You may look at it, replied the girl, offering me the book.
I did so.
A brief examination convinced me that the contents were less taking than the title.
Rassilus looked dull to my trifling taste.
I saw nothing about fairies, nothing about genii.
No bright variety seemed spread over the closely printed pages.
I returned it to her.
She received it quietly, and without saying anything she was about to relapse into her
former studious mood.
Again I ventured to disturb her.
Can you tell me what the writing on that stone over the door means?
What is Lowood Institution?
This house where you are come to live.
And why do they call it Institution?
Is it in any way different from other schools?
It is partly a charity school.
You and I, and all the rest of us, are charity children.
I suppose you are an orphan.
Are not either your father or your mother dead?
Both died before I can remember.
Well, all the girls here have lost either one or both parents.
And this is called an Institution for educating orphans.
Do we pay no money?
Do they keep us for nothing?
We pay, or our friends pay, fifteen pounds a year for each.
Then why do they call us charity children?
Because fifteen pounds is not enough for board and teaching,
and the deficiency is supplied by subscription.
Who subscribes?
Different benevolent-minded ladies and gentlemen in this neighborhood and in London.
Who is Naomi Brocklehurst?
The lady who built the new part of this house, as that tablet records,
and whose son overlooks and directs everything here.
Why?
Because he is treasurer and manager of the establishment.
Then this house does not belong to that tall lady who wears a watch
and who said we were to have some bread and cheese?
To Miss Temple?
Oh, no, I wish it did.
She has to answer to Mr. Brocklehurst for all she does.
Mr. Brocklehurst buys all our food and all our clothes.
Does he live here?
No, two miles off at a large hall.
Is he a good man?
He is a clergyman and is said to do a great deal of good.
Did you say that tall lady was called Miss Temple?
Yes.
And what are the other teachers called?
The one with red cheeks is called Miss Smith.
She attends to the work and cuts out,
for we make our own clothes, our frocks and polices, and everything.
The little one with black hair is Miss Gatchard.
She teaches history and grammar, and hears the second class repetitions.
And the one who wears a shawl and has a pocket handkerchief
tied to her side with a yellow ribbon is Madame Pierrot.
She comes from Lille in France and teaches French.
Do you like the teachers?
Well, enough.
Do you like the little black one and the madame?
I cannot pronounce her name as you do.
Miss Gatchard is hasty.
You must take care not to offend her.
Madame Pierrot is not a bad sort of person.
But Miss Temple is the best, isn't she?
Miss Temple is very good and very clever.
She is above the rest because she knows far more than they do.
Have you been long here?
Two years.
Are you an orphan?
My mother is dead.
Are you happy here?
You ask rather too many questions.
I have given you answers enough for the present.
Now I want to read.
But at that moment the summons sounded for dinner.
All re-entered the house.
The odor which now filled the refectory was scarcely more appetizing
than that which had regaled our nostrils at breakfast.
The dinner was served in two huge ten-plated vessels
whence rose a strong steam redolent of rancid fat.
I found the mess to consist of indifferent potatoes
and strange shreds of rusty meat mixed and cooked together.
Of this preparation a tolerably abundant plateful was apportioned to each pupil.
I ate what I could and wondered within myself
whether every day's fare would be like this.
After dinner we immediately adjourned to the schoolroom.
Lessons recommenced and were continued till five o'clock.
The only marked event of the afternoon was
that I saw the girl with whom I had conversed in the veranda
dismissed in disgrace by Miss Gatchard from a history class
and sent to stand in the middle of the large schoolroom.
The punishment seemed to me in a high degree ignominious,
especially for so great a girl.
She looked thirteen or upwards.
I expected she would show signs of great distress and shame,
but to my surprise she neither wept nor blushed.
Composed, though grave, she stood, the central mark of all eyes.
But how can she bear it so quietly, so firmly, I asked of myself?
Were I in her place, it seems to me I should wish the earth to open and swallow me up.
She looks as if she were thinking of something beyond her punishment,
beyond her situation, of something not round her nor before her.
I have heard of daydreams.
Is she in a daydream now?
Her eyes are fixed on the floor, but I am sure they do not see it.
Her sight seems turned in, gone down into her heart.
She is looking at what she can remember, I believe,
not at what is really present.
I wonder what sort of a girl she is, whether good or naughty.
Soon after five p.m., we had another meal,
consisting of a small mug of coffee and half a slice of brown bread.
I devoured my bread and drank my coffee with relish,
but I should have been glad of as much more.
I was still hungry.
Half an hour's recreation succeeded, then study,
then the glass of water and the piece of oat cake, prayers, and bed.
Such was my first day at Lowood.
The next day commenced as before, getting up and dressing by rush-light, but this morning we were obliged to dispense with the ceremony of washing, the water in the pitchers was frozen.
A change had taken place in the weather the preceding evening, and a keen northeast wind, whistling through the crevices of our bedroom windows all night long, had made us shiver in our beds, and turned the contents of the ewers to ice.
Before the long hour and a half of prayers and Bible reading was over, I felt ready to perish with the cold. Breakfast time came at last, and this morning the porridge was not burnt. The quality was eatable, the quantity small.
How small my portion seemed! I wished it had been doubled.
In the course of the day I was enrolled a member of the fourth class, and regular tasks and occupations were assigned me. Hitherto I had only been a spectator of the proceedings at Lowood. I was now to become an actor therein.
At first, being little accustomed to learn by heart, the lessons appeared to me both long and difficult. The frequent change from task to task, too, bewildered me, and I was glad when about three o'clock in the afternoon Miss Smith put into my hands a border of muslin two yards long, together with needle, thimble, etc., and sent me to sit in a quiet corner of the schoolroom, with directions to hem the same.
At that hour most of the others were sewing likewise, but one class still stood round Miss Scatchard's chair reading, and as all was quiet the subject of their lessons could be heard, together with the manner in which each girl acquitted herself, and the animate versions or commendations of Miss Scatchard on the performance.
It was English history. Among the readers I observed my acquaintance of the veranda. At the commencement of the lesson her place had been at the top of the class, but for some error of pronunciation or some inattention to stops, she was suddenly sent to the very bottom.
Even in that obscure position Miss Scatchard continued to make her an object of constant notice. She was continually addressing to her such phrases as the following.
Burns, such it seems was her name. The girls here were all called by their surnames as boys are elsewhere. Burns, you are standing on the side of your shoe. Turn your shoes out immediately. Burns, you poke your chin most unpleasantly. Draw it in.
Burns, I insist on your holding your head up. I will not have you before me in that attitude, etc., etc.
A chapter having been read through twice, the books were closed and the girls examined. The lesson had comprised part of the reign of Charles I, and there were sundry questions about tonnage and poundage and ship money, which most of them appeared unable to answer.
Still, every little difficulty was solved instantly when it reached Burns. Her memory seemed to have retained the substance of the whole lesson, and she was ready with answers on every point. I kept expecting that Miss Scatchard would praise her attention, but instead of that she suddenly cried out,
You dirty disagreeable girl, you have never cleaned your nails this morning. Burns made no answer. I wondered at her silence. Why, thought I, does she not explain that she could neither clean her nails nor wash her face as the water was frozen?
My attention was now called off by Miss Smith desiring me to hold a skein of thread. While she was winding it she talked to me from time to time, asking whether I had ever been at school before, whether I could mark, stitch, knit, etc. Till she dismissed me I could not pursue my observations on Miss Scatchard's movements.
When I returned to my seat that lady was just delivering an order of which I did not catch the import. But Burns immediately left the class, and going into the small inner room where the books were kept, returned in half a minute, carrying in her hand a bundle of twigs tied together at one end.
This ominous tool she presented to Miss Scatchard with a respectful curtsy. Then she quietly and without being told, unloosed her pinafore, and the teacher instantly and sharply inflicted on her neck a dozen strokes with a bunch of twigs.
Not a tear rose to Burns' eye. And while I paused from my sewing, because my fingers quivered at this spectacle with a sentiment of unavailing and impotent anger, not a feature of her pensive face altered its ordinary expression.
Hardened girl! exclaimed Miss Scatchard. Nothing can correct you of your slatternly habits. Carry the rod away.
Burns obeyed. I looked at her narrowly as she emerged from the book closet. She was just putting back her handkerchief into her pocket, and the trace of a tear glistened on her thin cheek.
The play hour in the evening I thought the pleasantest fraction of the day at Lowood. The bit of bread, the draught of coffee swallowed at five o'clock, had revived vitality, if it had not satisfied hunger.
The long restraint of the day was slackened. The schoolroom felt warmer then in the morning, its fires being allowed to burn a little more brightly to supply in some measure the place of candles not yet introduced.
The ruddy gloaming, the licensed uproar, the confusion of many voices gave one a welcome sense of liberty.
On the evening of the day which I had seen Miss Scatchard flog her pupil, Burns, I wandered as usual among the forms and tables and laughing groups without a companion, yet not feeling lonely.
When I passed the windows I now and then lifted a blind and looked out. It snowed fast, a drift was already forming against the lower panes. Putting my ear close to the window I could distinguish from the gleeful tumult within the disconsolate moan of the wind outside.
Probably if I had lately left a good home and kind parents, this would have been the hour when I should most keenly have regretted the separation. That wind would then have saddened my heart.
This obscure chaos would have disturbed my peace. As it was, I derived from both a strange excitement and reckless and feverish, I wished the wind to howl more wildly, the gloom to deepen to darkness and the confusion to rise to clamor.
Jumping over forms and creeping under tables, I made my way to one of the fireplaces. There, kneeling by the high wire fender, I found Burns, absorbed, silent, abstracted from all around her by the companionship of a book, which she read by the dim glare of the embers.
Is it still Ras Las? I asked, coming behind her. Yes, she said, and I have just finished it. And in five minutes more she shut it up. I was glad of this. Now, thought I, I can perhaps get her to talk. I sat down by her on the floor.
What is your name besides Burns? Helen? Do you come a long way from here? I come from a place farther north, quite on the borders of Scotland. Will you ever go back? I hope so, but nobody can be sure of the future.
You must wish to leave Lowood. No, why should I? I was sent to Lowood to get an education, and it would be of no use going away until I have attained that object. But that teacher, Miss Scatchard, is so cruel to you.
Cruel? Not at all. She is severe. She dislikes my faults. And if I were in your place I should dislike her. I should resist her. If she struck me with that rod I should get it from her hand. I should break it under her nose.
Probably you would do nothing of the sort, but if you did Mr. Brocklehurst would expel you from the school. That would be a great grief to your relations. It is far better to endure patiently a smart, which nobody feels but yourself, than to commit a hasty action whose evil consequences will extend to all connected with you. And besides, the Bible bids us return good for evil.
But then it seems disgraceful to be flogged and to be sent to stand in the middle of a room full of people. And you are such a great girl. I am far younger than you and I could not bear it. Yet it would be your duty to bear it, if you could not avoid it. It is weak and silly to say you cannot bear what it is your fate to be required to bear.
I heard her with wonder. I could not comprehend this doctrine of endurance. And still less I could understand or sympathize with the forbearance she expressed for her chastiser. Still I felt that Helen Burns considered things by a light invisible to my eyes. I suspected she might be right and I wrong. But I would not ponder the matter deeply. Like Felix I put it off to a more convenient season.
You say you have faults, Helen. What are they? To me you seem very good.
Then learn from me not to judge by appearances. I am, as Miss Gatchard said, slatternly. I seldom put and never keep things in order. I am careless. I forget rules. I read when I should learn my lessons. I have no method. And sometimes I say, like you, I cannot bear to be subjected to systematic arrangements.
This is all very provoking to Miss Gatchard, who is naturally neat, punctual and particular. And cross and cruel, I added. But Helen Burns would not admit my addition. She kept silence.
Is Miss Temple as severe to you as Miss Gatchard? At the utterance of Miss Temple's name, a soft smile flitted over her gray face.
Miss Temple is full of goodness. It pains her to be severe to anyone, even the worst in the school. She sees my errors and tells me of them gently. And if I do anything worthy of praise, she gives me my mead liberally.
One strong proof of my wretchedly defective nature is that even her expostulations, so mild, so rational, have not influenced to cure me of my faults. And even her praise, though I value it most highly, cannot stimulate me to continued care and foresight.
That is curious, said I. It is so easy to be careful.
For you I have no doubt it is. I observed you in your class this morning and saw you were closely attentive. Your thoughts never seemed to wander, while Miss Miller explained the lesson and questioned you.
Now mine continually rove away when I should be listening to Miss Gatchard and collecting all she says with assiduity. Often I lose the very sound of her voice. I fall into a sort of dream.
Sometimes I think I am in Northumberland and that the noises I hear around me are the bubbling of a little brook which runs through deep den near our house. Then, when it comes to my turn to reply, I have to be awakened. And having heard nothing of what was read for listening to the visionary brook, I have no answer ready.
Yet how well you replied this afternoon.
It was mere chance. The subject on which we had been reading had interested me. This afternoon, instead of dreaming of deep den, I was wondering how a man who wished to do right could act so unjustly and unwisely as Charles I sometimes did. And I thought, what a pity it was that, with his integrity and conscientiousness, he could see no farther than the prerogatives of the crown.
If he had but been able to look at a distance and see how what they call the spirit of the age was tending. Still, I like Charles. I respect him. I pity him. Poor murdered king. Yet his enemies were the worst. They shed blood they had no right to shed. How dared they kill him.
Helen was talking to herself now. She had forgotten I could not very well understand her, that I was ignorant, or nearly so, of the subject she discussed. I recalled her to my level.
And when Miss Temple teaches you, do your thoughts wander then?
No, certainly not often, because Miss Temple has generally something to say which is newer than my own reflections. Her language is singularly agreeable to me, and the information she communicates is often just what I wished to gain.
Well then, with Miss Temple you are good?
Yes, in a passive way. I make no effort. I follow as inclination guides me. There is no merit in such goodness.
A great deal. You are good to those who are good to you. It is all I ever desire to be. If people were always kind and obedient to those who are cruel and unjust, the wicked people would have it all their own way. They would never feel afraid, and so they would never alter, but would grow worse and worse.
When we are struck at without a reason, we should strike back again very hard. I am sure we should, so hard as to teach the person who struck us never to do it again.
You will change your mind, I hope, when you grow older. As yet, you are but a little untaught girl.
But I feel this, Helen. I must dislike those who, whatever I do to please them, persist in disliking me. I must resist those who punish me unjustly. It is as natural as that I should love those who show me affection, or submit to punishment when I feel it is deserved.
Heathens and savage tribes hold that doctrine, but Christians and civilized nations disown it. How? I don't understand. It is not violence that best overcomes hate, nor vengeance that most certainly heals injury. What then?
Read the New Testament and observe what Christ says and how he acts. Make his word your rule and his conduct your example. What does he say? Love your enemies. Bless them that curse you. Do good to them that hate you and despitefully use you.
Then I should love Mrs. Read? Which I cannot do. I should bless her son John, which is impossible.
In her turn, Helen Burns asked me to explain, and I proceeded forthwith to pour out, in my own way, the tale of my sufferings and resentments. Bitter and truculent when excited, I spoke as I felt, without reserve or softening.
Helen heard me patiently to the end. I expected she would then make a remark, but she said nothing.
Well, I asked impatiently, is not Mrs. Read a hard-hearted bad woman?
She has been unkind to you, no doubt, because you see she dislikes your cast of character, as Miss Gatcher does mine. But how minutely you remember all she has done and said to you! What a singularly deep impression her injustice seems to have made on your heart!
No illusage so brands its record on my feelings. Would you not be happier if you tried to forget her severity, together with the passionate emotions it excited?
Life appears to me too short to be spent in nursing animosity or registering wrongs. We are and must be, one and all, burdened with faults in this world. But the time will soon come when, I trust, we shall put them off in putting off our corruptible bodies.
When debasement and sin will fall from us with this cumbrous frame of flesh, and only the spark of the spirit will remain. The impalpable principle of light and thought, pure as when it left the Creator to inspire the Creator.
Whence it came, it will return, perhaps again to be communicated to some being higher than man, perhaps to pass through gradations of glory from the pale human soul to brighten to the seraph. Surely it will never, on the contrary, be suffered to degenerate from man to fiend?
No, I cannot believe that. I hold another creed, which no one ever taught me and which I seldom mention, but in which I delight and to which I cling, for it extends hope to all. It makes eternity a rest, a mighty home, not a terror and an abyss.
Besides, with this creed I can so clearly distinguish between the criminal and his crime. I can so sincerely forgive the first while I abhor the last. With this creed revenge never worries my heart. The degradation never too deeply disgusts me. Injustice never crushes me too low. I live in calm, looking to the end.
Helen's head, always drooping, sank a little lower as she finished this sentence. I saw by her look she wished no longer to talk to me, but rather to converse with her own thoughts. She was not allowed much time for meditation. A monitor, a great rough girl, presently came up, exclaiming in a strong Cumberland accent.
Helen burns. If you don't go and put your drawer in order and fold up your work this minute, I'll tell Miss Getcher to come and look at it.
Helen sighed as her reverie fled, and getting up, obeyed the monitor without reply, as without delay.
.
My first quarter at Lowood seemed an age,
and not the Golden Age, either.
It comprised an irksome struggle with difficulties
in habituating myself to new rules and unwanted tasks.
The fear of failure in these points
harassed me worse than the physical hardships of my lot,
though these were no trifles.
During January, February, and part of March, the deep snows,
and after the melting, the almost impassable roads
prevented our stirring beyond the garden walls,
except to go to church.
But within these limits, we had to pass an hour every day
in the open air.
Our clothing was insufficient to protect us
from the severe cold.
We had no boots.
The snow got into our shoes and melted there.
Our ungloved hands became numbed and covered with chilglains,
as were our feet.
I remember well the distracting irritation
I endured from this cause every evening,
when my feet inflamed and the torture of thrusting
the swelled, raw, and stiff toes into my shoes in the morning.
Then the scanty supply of food was distressing.
With a keen appetite of growing children,
we had scarcely sufficient to keep alive a delicate invalid.
From this deficiency of nourishment
resulted in abuse, which pressed hardly on the younger pupils.
Whenever the famished great girls had an opportunity,
they would coax or menace the little ones out
of their portion.
Many a time I have shared between two claimants
the precious morsel of brown bread distributed at teatime.
And after relinquishing to a third half the contents
of a mug of coffee, I have swallowed the remainder
with an accompaniment of secret tears, forced for me
by the exigency of hunger.
Sundays were dreary days in that wintry season.
We had to walk two miles to Brocklebridge Church,
where our patron officiated.
We set out cold.
We arrived at Church colder.
During the morning service, we became almost paralyzed.
It was too far to return to dinner.
And an allowance of cold meat and bread,
in the same penorious proportion observed
in our ordinary meals, was served round
between the services.
At the close of the afternoon service,
we returned by an exposed and hilly road,
where the bitter winter wind, blowing
over a range of snowy summits to the north,
almost flayed the skin from our faces.
I can remember Miss Temple walking
lightly and rapidly along our drooping line,
her plaid cloak, which the frosty wind fluttered,
gathered close about her, and encouraging us,
by precept and example, to keep up our spirits
and march forward, as she said, like stalwart soldiers.
The other teachers, poor things, were generally themselves
too much dejected to attempt the task of cheering others.
How we longed for the light and heat of a blazing fire
when we got back.
But to the little ones, at least, this was denied.
Each hearth in the schoolroom was immediately surrounded
by a double row of great girls, and behind them,
the younger children crouched in groups,
wrapping their starved arms in their pinafores.
A little solace came at tea time,
in the shape of a double ration of bread,
a whole instead of a half slice,
with a delicious addition of a thin scrape of butter.
It was the hebdominal treat to which we all looked forward
from Sabbath to Sabbath.
I generally contrived to reserve a moiety
of this boundary past for myself,
but the remainder I was invariably obliged to part with.
The Sunday evening was spent in repeating, by heart,
the church catechism and the fifth, sixth,
and seventh chapters of St. Matthew,
and in listening to a long sermon read by Miss Miller,
whose irrepressible yawns attested her weariness.
A frequent interlude of these performances
was the enactment of the part of Eudicus
by some half dozen of little girls,
who, overpowered with sleep, would fall down,
if not out of the third loft, yet off the fourth form,
and be taken up half dead.
The remedy was to thrust them forward
into the center of the schoolroom
and oblige them to stand there till the sermon was finished.
Sometimes their feet failed them,
and they sank together in a heap.
They were then propped up with the monitor's high stools.
I have not yet alluded to the visits of Mr. Brocklehurst,
and indeed that gentleman was from home
during the greater part of the first month
after my arrival.
Perhaps prolonging his stay with his friend, the archdeacon,
his absence was a relief to me.
I need not say that I have my own reasons
for dreading his coming, but come he did at last.
One afternoon, I had then been three weeks at Lowood,
as I was sitting with a slate in my hand,
puzzling over a sum and long division,
my eyes, raised in abstraction to the window,
caught sight of a figure just passing.
I recognized almost instinctively that gaunt outline,
and when, two minutes after, all the school,
teachers included, rose en masse,
it was not necessary for me to look up
in order to ascertain whose entrance they thus greeted.
A long stride measured the schoolroom,
and presently beside Miss Temple, who herself had risen,
stood the same black column which had frowned on me
so ominously from the hearth rug of Gateshead.
I now glance sideways at this piece of architecture.
Yes, I was right, it was Mr. Brocklehurst,
buttoned up in a certut, and looking longer,
narrower, and more rigid than ever.
I had my own reasons for being dismayed at this apparition.
Too well I remembered the perfidious hints
given by Mrs. Reed about my disposition, et cetera,
the promise pledged by Mr. Brocklehurst
to reprise Miss Temple and the teachers of a vicious nature.
All along, I had been dreading
the fulfillment of this promise.
I had been looking out daily for the coming man,
whose information respecting my past life and conversation
was to brand me as a bad child forever.
Now, there he was.
He stood at Miss Temple's side.
He was speaking low in her ear.
I did not doubt he was making disclosures of my villainy,
and I watched her eye with painful anxiety,
expecting every moment to see its dark orb turn on me
a glance of repugnance and contempt.
I listened, too, and as I happened to be seated
quite at the top of the room, I caught most of what he said.
Its import relieved me from immediate apprehension.
I suppose, Miss Temple, the thread I bought at Loughton
will do.
It struck me that it would be just of the quality
for the calico chemises, and I sorted the needles to match.
You may tell Miss Smith that I forgot to make
a memorandum of the darning needles,
but she shall have some papers sent in next week,
and she is not on any account to give out more
than one at a time to each pupil.
If they have more, they are apt to be careless
and lose them, and oh, ma'am.
I wish the woolen stockings were better looked to.
When I was here last, I went into the kitchen garden
and examined the clothes drying on the line.
There was a quantity of black hose
in a very bad state of repair.
From the size of the holes in them,
I was sure they had not been well mended from time to time.
He paused.
Your direction shall be attended to, sir, said Miss Temple.
And ma'am, he continued, the laundress tells me
some of the girls have two clean tuckers in the week.
It is too much.
The rules limit them to one.
I think I can explain that circumstance, sir.
Agnes and Catherine Johnstone were invited to take tea
with some friends at Loughton last Thursday,
and I gave them leave to put on clean tuckers
for the occasion.
Mr. Brocklehurst nodded.
Well, for once it may pass,
but please not to let the circumstance occur too often.
And there is another thing which surprised me.
I find in settling accounts with the housekeeper
that a lunch consisting of bread and cheese
has twice been served out to the girls
during the past fortnight.
How is this?
I looked over the regulations
and I find no such meal as lunch mentioned.
Who introduced this innovation?
And by what authority?
I must be responsible for the circumstance, sir,
replied Miss Temple.
The breakfast was so ill-prepared
that the pupils could not possibly eat it,
and I dared not allow them to remain fasting
till dinner time.
Madam, allow me an instant.
You are aware that my plan in bringing up these girls
is not to accustom them to habits of luxury and indulgence,
but to render them hearty, patient, self-denying.
Should any little accidental disappointment
of the appetite occur, such as the spoiling of a meal,
the under or the overdressing of a dish,
the incident ought not to be neutralized
by replacing with something more delicate
the comfort lost,
thus pampering the body
and obviating the sum of this institution.
It ought to be improved
to the spiritual edification of the pupils
by encouraging them to evince fortitude
under temporary probation.
A brief address on those occasions would not be mistimed,
wherein a judicious instructor
would take the opportunity of referring to the sufferings
of the primitive Christians
to the torments of martyrs,
to the exhortations of our blessed Lord himself,
calling upon his disciples
to take up the cross and follow him,
to his warnings that man should not live by bread alone,
but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God,
to his divine consolations.
If ye suffer hunger or thirst for my sake, happy are ye.
Oh, madam, when you put bread and cheese
instead of burnt porridge into these children's mouths,
you may indeed feed their vile bodies,
but you little think how you starve their immortal souls.
Mr. Brocklehurst again paused,
perhaps overcome by his feelings.
Miss Temple had looked down
when he first began to speak to her,
but she now gazed straight before her,
and her face, naturally pale as marble,
appeared to be assuming also the coldness
and fixity of that material, especially her mouth,
closed as if it would have required
a sculptor's chisel to open it,
and her brow settled gradually
into petrified severity.
Meantime, Mr. Brocklehurst, standing on the hearth
with his hands behind his back,
majestically surveyed the whole school.
Suddenly, his eyes gave a blink,
as if it had meant something
that either dazzled or shocked its pupil.
Turning, he said in more rapid accents
that he had hitherto used,
Miss Temple, Miss Temple, what?
What is that girl with curled hair?
Red hair, ma'am, curled, curled all over.
And extending his cane, he pointed to the awful object,
his hand shaking as he did so.
It is Julia Severn, replied Miss Temple very quietly.
Julia Severn, ma'am, and why has she
or any other curled hair?
Why, in defiance of every precept
and principle of this house,
does she conform to the world so openly,
here in an evangelical charitable establishment
as to where her hair one mass of curls?
Julia's hair curls naturally,
returned Miss Temple, still more quietly.
Naturally, yes, but we are not to conform to nature.
I wish these girls to be the children of grace,
and why that abundance?
I have again and again intimated
that I desire the hair to be arranged closely,
modestly, plainly.
Miss Temple, that girl's hair must be cut off entirely.
I will send a borrower tomorrow,
and I see others who are far too much of the excretions.
That tall girl, tell her to turn round.
Tell all the first form to rise up
and direct their faces to the wall.
Miss Temple passed her handkerchief over her lips,
as if to smooth away the involuntary smile
that curled them.
She gave the order, however,
and when the first class could take in
what was required of them, they obeyed.
Leaning a little back on my bench,
I could see the looks and grimaces
with which they commented on this maneuver.
It was a pity Mr. Rocklehurst could not see them, too.
He would perhaps have felt that.
Whatever he might do with the outside of the cup and platter,
the inside was farther beyond his interference
than he imagined.
He scrutinized the reverse of these living medals
some five minutes, then pronounced sentence.
These words fell like the knell of doom.
All those top knots must be cut off.
Miss Temple seemed to remonstrate.
Madam, he would.
I have a master to serve,
whose kingdom is not of this world.
My mission is to mortify in these girls
the lust of the flesh,
to teach them to clothe themselves
with shame-facedness and sobriety,
not with braided hair and costly apparel.
And each of the young persons before us
has a string of hair twisted in plates,
which vanity itself might have woven.
These, I repeat, must be cut off.
Think of the time wasted of...
Mr. Rocklehurst was here interrupted.
Three other visitors, ladies, now entered the room.
They ought to have come a little sooner
to have heard his lecture on dress,
for they were splendidly attired
in velvet, silk, and furs.
The two younger of the trio,
fine girls of 16 and 17,
had gray beaver hats, then in fashion,
shaded with ostrich plumes,
and from under the brim of this graceful headdress
fell a profusion of light tresses elaborately curled.
The elder lady was enveloped in a costly velvet shawl,
trimmed with ermine,
and she wore a false front of French girls.
These ladies were deferentially received by Miss Temple
as Mrs. and Mrs. Rocklehurst,
and conducted to seats of honor at the top of the room.
It seems they had come in the carriage
with their reverend relative,
and had been conducting a rummaging scrutiny
of the room upstairs,
while he transacted business with the housekeeper,
questioned the laundress,
and lectured the superintendent.
They now proceeded to address diverse remarks
and reproofs to Miss Smith,
who was charged with the care of the linen
in the inspection of the dormitories,
but I had no time to listen to what they said.
Other matters called off and enchanted my attention.
Hitherto, while gathering up the discourse
of Mrs. Rocklehurst and Miss Temple,
I had not, at the same time,
neglected precautions to secure my personal safety,
which I thought would be effected
if I could only elude observation.
To this end, I had sat well back on the form,
and while seeming to be busy with my sum,
had held my slate in such a manner as to conceal my face.
I might have escaped noticed,
had not my treacherous slate
somehow happened to slip from my hand
and fallen with an obtrusive crash,
directly drawn every eye upon me.
I knew it was all over now,
and as I stooped up to pick up the two fragments of slate,
I rallied my forces for the worst.
It came.
A careless girl, said Mr. Rocklehurst,
and immediately after, it is the new pupil I perceive.
And before I could draw a breath,
I must not forget I have a word to say respecting her.
That aloud, how loud it seemed to me,
let the child who broke her slate come forward.
Of my own accord, I could not have stirred.
I was paralyzed, but the two great girls
who sat on each side of me,
set me on my legs and pushed me towards the dread judge.
And then Miss Temple gently assisted me to his very feet,
and I caught her whispered counsel.
Don't be afraid, Jane.
I saw it was an accident.
You shall not be punished.
The kind whisper went to my heart like a dagger.
Another minute, and she'll despise me for hypocrite,
thought I, and an impulse of fury
against Reed, Rocklehurst, and company
bounded in my pulses at the conviction.
I was no Helen Burns.
Fetch that stool, said Mr. Rocklehurst,
pointing to a very high one
from which a monitor had just risen.
It was brought.
Place the child upon it.
And I was placed there, by whom I don't know.
I was in no condition to note particulars.
I was only aware that they had hoisted me up
to the height of Mr. Rocklehurst's nose,
that he was within a yard of me,
and that a spread of shot orange and purple silk polices
and a cloud of silvery plumage extended and waved below me.
Mr. Rocklehurst hemmed.
Ladies, said he, turning to his family,
Miss Temple, teachers, and children,
you all see this girl?
Of course they did, for I felt their eyes directed
like burning glasses against my scorched skin.
You see she is yet young.
You observe that she possesses
the ordinary form of childhood.
God has graciously given her the shape
that he has given to all of us.
No signal deformity points her out as a marked character.
Who would think that the evil one
has already found a servant and agent in her?
Yet such, I grieve to say, is the case.
A pause, in which I began to steady the palsy of my nerves,
and to feel that the Rubicon had passed.
And that the trial, no longer to be shirked,
must be firmly sustained.
My dear children, pursued the black marble clergyman,
with pathos, this is a sad, a melancholy occasion.
For it becomes my duty to warn you that this girl,
who might be one of God's own lambs, is a little cast away.
Not a member of the true flock,
but evidently an interloper and an alien.
You must be on your guard against her.
You must shun her example.
If necessary, avoid her company.
Exclude her from your sports,
and shut her out from your converse.
Teachers, you must watch her.
Keep your eyes on her movements.
Weigh well her words.
Scrutinize her actions.
Punish her body to save her soul.
If, indeed, such salvation be possible.
For, my tongue falters while I tell it,
this girl, this child, the native of a Christian land,
worse than many a little heathen
who says its prayers to Brahma and kneels before Juggernaut,
this girl is a liar.
Now came a pause of 10 minutes,
during which I, by this time,
in perfect possession of my wits,
observed all the female Brocklehursts
produce their pocket handkerchiefs
and apply them to their optics,
while the elderly lady swayed herself to and fro,
and the two younger ones whispered, how shocking.
Mr. Brocklehurst resumed.
This I learned from her benefactress,
from the pious and charitable lady
who adopted her in her orphaned state,
reared her as her own daughter,
and whose kindness, whose generosity,
the unhappy girl repaid by an ingratitude so bad,
so dreadful, that at last her excellent patroness
was obliged to separate her from her own young ones,
fearful lest her vicious examples
should contaminate their purity.
She has sent her here to be healed.
Even as the Jews of old sent their disease
to the troubled pool of Bethesda,
and teachers, superintendent,
I beg of you not to allow the waters
to stagnate around her.
With this sublime conclusion,
Mr. Brocklehurst adjusted the top button of her Sertut,
muttered something to his family, who rose,
bowed to Miss Temple,
and then all the great people sailed in state from the room.
Turning at the door, my judge said,
Let her stand half an hour longer on that stool,
and let no one speak to her during the remainder of the day.
There was I then, mounted aloft,
I, who had said I could not bear the shame
of standing on my natural feet in the middle of the room,
was now exposed to general view on a pedestal of infamy.
What my sensations were no language can describe,
but just as they all rose, stifling my breath,
and constricting my throat,
a girl came up and passed me.
In passing, she lifted her eyes.
What a strange light inspired them!
What an extraordinary sensation that rays sent through me!
How the new feeling bore me up!
It was as if a martyr, a hero, had passed a slave or victim,
and imparted strength in the transit.
I mastered the rising hysteria, lifted up my head,
and took a firm stand on the stool.
Helen Burns asked some slight question
about her work of Miss Smith.
Was chidden for the triviality of the inquiry,
returned to her place, and smiled at me as she again went by.
What a smile!
I remember it now, and I know that it was the effluence
of fine intellect, of true courage.
It lit up her marked liniments, her thin face,
her sunken gray eye, like a reflection
from the aspect of an angel.
Yet at that moment Helen Burns wore on her arm
the untidy badge.
Scarcely an hour ago I had heard her condemned
by Miss Scatchard to a dinner of bread and water
on the morrow, because she had blotted in exercise
and copying it out.
Such is the imperfect nature of man.
Such spots are there on the disk of the clearest planet,
and eyes like Miss Scatchard's can only
see those minute defects and are blind to the full brightness
of the orb.
Ere the half-hour ended, five o'clock struck, school was dismissed, and all were gone into
the refractory for tea. I now ventured to descend. It was deep dusk. I retired into a corner and sat
down on the floor. The spell by which I had been so far supported began to dissolve. Reaction took
place. And soon, so overwhelming was the grief that seized me, I sank prostrate with my face
to the ground. Now I wept. Helen Burns was not here. Nothing sustained me. Left to myself,
I abandoned myself. And my tears watered the boards. I had meant to be so good, and to do so
much at Lowood, to make so many friends, to earn respect and win affection. Already I had made
visible progress. That very morning I had reached the head of my class. Miss Miller had praised me
informally. Miss Temple had smiled approbation. She had promised to teach me drawing. And to let
me learn French, if I continued to make similar improvement two months longer. And then I was
well received by my fellow pupils. Treated as an equal by those of my own age, and not molested by
any. Now here I lay again, crushed and trodden on. And could I ever rise more? Never, I thought.
Inartently I wished to die. While sobbing out this wish in broken accents, someone approached.
I started up. Again, Helen Burns was near me. The fading fires just showed her coming up the long
vacant room. She brought my coffee and bread.
Come, eat something, she said. But I put both away from me, feeling as if a drop or a crumb
would have choked me in my present condition. Helen regarded me, probably with surprise.
I could not now abate my agitation, though I tried hard. I continued to weep aloud.
She sat down on the ground near me, embraced her knees with her arms, and rested her head upon
them. In that attitude she remained silent as an Indian. I was the first who spoke.
Helen, why do you stay with a girl whom everyone believes to be a liar?
Everybody Jane? Why, there are only eighty people who have heard you called so,
and the world contains hundreds of millions. But what have I to do with millions?
The eighty I know despise me. Jane, you are mistaken. Probably not one in the school
either despises or dislikes you. Many, I am sure, pee you much.
How can they pity me after what Mr. Brocklehurst has said?
Mr. Brocklehurst is not a god, nor is he even a great and admired man.
He is little liked here. He never took steps to make himself liked. Had he treated you as
a special favorite you would have found enemies, declared or covert, all around you. As it is,
the greater number would offer you sympathy if they dared. Teachers and pupils may look
coldly on you for a day or two, but friendly feelings are concealed in their hearts,
and if you persevere in doing well, these feelings will ere long appear
so much the more evidently for their temporary suppression. Besides Jane, she paused.
Well, Helen, said I, putting my hand into hers, she chafed my fingers gently to warm them,
and went on. If all the world hated you and believed you wicked while your own conscience
approved you and absolved you from guilt, you would not be without friends.
No, I know I should think well of myself, but that is not enough. If others don't love me
I would rather die than live. I cannot bear to be solitary and hated, Helen. Look here.
To gain some real affection from you or Miss Temple or any other whom I truly love I would
submit to have the bone of my arm broken, or to let a bull toss me, or to stand behind a kicking
horse and let it dash its hoof at my chest. Hush, Jane, you think too much of the love of human
beings. You are too impulsive, too venomous. The sovereign hand that created your frame
and put life into it has provided you with other resources than your feeble self,
or than creatures feeble as you. Besides this earth and besides the race of men, there isn't
an invisible world and a kingdom of spirits. That world is round us, for it is everywhere,
and those spirits watch us, for they are commissioned to guard us. And if we were dying
in pain and shame, if scorns smote us on all sides and hatred crushed us, angels see our tortures,
recognize our innocence. If innocent we be, as I know you are of this charge which Mr.
Brocklehurst has weekly and pompously repeated at second hand from Mrs. Reed, for I read a
sincere nature in your ardent eyes and on your clear front. And God waits only the separation
of spirit from flesh to crown us with a full reward. Why, then, should we ever sink overwhelmed
with distress, when life is so soon over and death is so certain an entrance to happiness,
to glory? I was silent. Helen had calmed me, but in the tranquility she imparted there was an alloy
of inexpressible sadness. I felt the impression of woe as she spoke, but I could not tell whence
came, and when, having done speaking, she breathed a little fast and coughed short cough,
I momentarily forgot my own sorrows to yield to a vague concern for her.
Resting my head on Helen's shoulder, I put my arms round her waist. She drew me to her,
and we reposed in silence. We had not sat long thus. When another person came in, some heavy
clouds, swept from the sky by a rising wind, had left the moon bare, and her light streaming
in through a window near, shone full both on us and on the approaching figure, which we at once
recognized as Miss Temple. I came on purpose to find you, Jane Eyre, said she. I want you in my
room, and as Helen Burns is with you, she may come too. We went, following the superintendent's
guidance, we had to thread some intricate passages, and mount a staircase before we reached her
apartment. It contained a good fire, and looked cheerful. Miss Temple told Helen Burns to be
seated in a low armchair on one side of the hearth, and herself taking another, she called me to her
side. Is it all over? she asked, looking down at my face. Have you cried your grief away?
I am afraid I shall never do that. Why? Because I have been wrongly accused, and you, ma'am,
and everybody else, will now think me wicked. We shall thank you what you prove yourself to be,
my child. Continue to act as a good girl, and you will satisfy us. Shall I, Miss Temple?
You will, said she, passing her arm round me. And now, tell me who is the lady who Mr.
Brucklehurst called your benefactress? Mrs. Reed, my uncle's wife. My uncle is dead, and he left me
to her care. Did she not then adopt you of her own accord? No, ma'am. She was sorry to have to do it.
But my uncle, as I have often heard the servants say, got her to promise before he died that she
would always keep me. Well now, Jane, you know, or at least I will tell you, that when a criminal
is accused he is always allowed to speak in his own defense. You have been charged with falsehood.
Defend yourself to me as well as you can. Say whatever your memory suggests is true,
but add nothing, and exaggerate nothing. I resolved in the depth of my heart that I would
be most moderate, most correct, and having reflected a few minutes in order to arrange
coherently what I had to say, I told her all the story of my sad childhood. Exhausted by emotion,
my language was more subdued than it generally was when it developed that sad theme.
And mindful of Helen's warnings against the indulgence of resentment, I infused into the
narrative far less of gall and warm wood than ordinary. Thus restrained and simplified,
it sounded more credible. I felt as I went on that Miss Temple fully believed me.
In the course of the tale I had mentioned Mr. Lloyd as having come to see me after the fit,
for I never forgot the, to me, frightful episode of The Red Room, in detailing which my excitement
was sure, in some degree, to break bounds, for nothing could soften in my recollection
the spasm of agony which clutched my heart when Mrs. Reed spurned my wild supplication for pardon
and locked me a second time in the dark and haunted chamber.
I had finished. Miss Temple regarded me a few minutes in silence. She then said,
I know something of Mr. Lloyd. I shall write to him if his reply agrees with your statement.
You shall be publicly cleared from every imputation. To me, Jane, you are clear now.
She kissed me and stuck keeping me at her side, where I was well contented to stand,
for I derived a child's pleasure from the contemplation of her face, her dress, her one
or two ornaments, her white forehead, her clustered and shining curls, and beaming dark eyes. She
proceeded to address Helen Burns. How are you tonight, Helen? Have you coughed much today?
Not quite so much, I think, ma'am. And the pain in your chest?
It is a little better. Miss Temple got up, took her hand, and examined her pulse.
Then she returned to her own seat. As she resumed it, I heard her sigh low. She was pensive a few
minutes. Then, rousing herself, she said cheerfully, But you two are my visitors tonight.
I must treat you as such. She rang a bell. Barbara? She said to the servant who answered it,
I have not yet had tea. Bring the tray and place cups for these two young ladies.
And a tray was soon brought. How pretty to my eyes did the china cups and bright teapot look.
Placed on a little round table near the fire. How fragrant was the steam of the beverage
and the scent of the toast? Of which, however, I, to my dismay, for I was beginning to be hungry,
discerned only a very small portion. Miss Temple discerned it, too.
Barbara, said she, Can you not bring a little more bread and butter?
There is not enough for three. Barbara went out. She returned soon.
Madam, Mrs. Hardin says she has sent up the usual quantity.
Mrs. Hardin, be it observed, was the housekeeper, a woman after Mr. Brocklehurst's own heart,
made up of equal parts of whalebone and iron. Oh, very well, returned Miss Temple. We must make
do, Barbara, I suppose. And as the girl withdrew, she added smiling, Fortunately,
I have it in my power to supply deficiencies for this once.
Having invited Helen and me to approach the table and place before each of us a cup of tea
with one delicious but thin morsel of toast, she got up, unlocked a drawer, and taking from it
a parcel, wrapped in paper, disclosed presently to our eyes a good-sized seed cake.
I meant to give each of you some of this to take with you,
said she. But as there is so little toast, you must have it now.
And she proceeded to cut slices with a generous hand.
We feasted that evening as on nectar and ambrosia,
and not the least delight of the entertainment was a smile of gratification with which our hostess
regarded us, as we satisfied our famished appetites on the delicate fare she liberally supplied.
Tea over and the tray removed, she again summoned us to the fire. We sat one on each side of her,
and now a conversation followed between her and Helen, which it was indeed a privilege
to be admitted to here. Miss Temple had always something of serenity in her air,
of state in her mien, of refined propriety in her language, which precluded deviation into the
ardent, the excited, the eager, something which chastened the pleasure of those who looked on her
and listened to her by a controlling sense of awe. And such was my feeling now, but as to Helen
I was struck with wonder. The refreshing meal, the brilliant fire, the presence and kindness of her
beloved instructress, or, perhaps more than all these, something in her own unique mind had roused
her powers within her. They woke, they kindled. First they glowed in the bright tint of her cheek,
which till this hour I had never seen but pale and bloodless. Then they shone in the liquid luster
of her eyes, which had suddenly acquired a beauty more singular than that of Miss Temple's, a beauty
neither of fine colour, nor long eyelash, nor penciled brow, but of meaning, of movement,
of radiance. Then her soul sat on her lips, and language flowed, from what source I cannot tell.
Has a girl of fourteen a heart large enough, vigorous enough, to hold the swelling spring
of pure, full, fervid eloquence? Such was a characteristic of Helen's discourse on that,
to me, memorable evening. Her spirit seemed hastening to live within a very brief span,
as much as many live during a protracted existence.
They conversed of things I had never heard of, of nations and times past, of countries far away,
of secrets of nature discovered or guessed at. They spoke of books, how many they had read,
what stores of knowledge they possessed. Then they seemed so familiar with French names
and French authors. But my amazement reached its climax when Miss Temple asked Helen
if she sometimes snatched a moment to recall the Latin her father had taught her.
And, taking a book from the shelf, bade her read and construe a page of Virgil.
And Helen obeyed, my organ of veneration expanding at every sounding line.
She had scarcely finished, ere the bell announced bedtime.
No delay could be admitted. Miss Temple embraced us both, saying, as she drew us to her heart,
God bless you, my children. Helen she held a little longer than me.
She let her go more reluctantly. It was Helen her eye followed to the door. It was for her
a second time, breathed a sad sigh. For her she wept a tear from her cheek.
On reaching the bedroom we heard the voice of Miss Scatchard. She was examining drawers.
She had just pulled out Helen Burns's. And when we entered Helen was greeted with a sharp reprimand,
and told that tomorrow she should have half a dozen of untidily folded articles pinned to
her shoulder. My things were indeed in shameful disorder, murmured Helen to me in a low voice.
I intended to have arranged them, but I forgot. Next morning Miss Scatchard wrote
inconspicuous characters on a piece of pasteboard, the word slattern, and bound it like a phylactery
round Helen's large, mild, intelligent and benign-looking forehead. She wore it till evening,
patient, unresentful, regarding it as a deserved punishment. The moment Miss Scatchard withdrew
after afternoon school, I ran to Helen, tore it off, and thrust it into the fire, the fury of which
she was incapable, had been burning in my soul all day, and tears, hot and large, had continually
been scalding my cheek, for the spectacle of her sad resignation gave me an intolerable pain at the heart.
About a week subsequently to the incidents above narrated, Miss Temple, who had written to Mr. Lloyd,
received his answer. It appeared that what he said went to corroborate my account. Miss Temple,
having assembled the whole school, announced the inquiry had been made into the charges alleged
against Jane Eyre, and that she was most happy to be able to pronounce her completely cleared
from every imputation. The teachers then shook hands with me and kissed me, and a murmur of pleasure
ran through the ranks of my companions. Thus relieved of a grievous load, I, from that hour,
set to work afresh, resolved to pioneer my way through every difficulty. I toiled hard,
and my success was proportionate to my effort. My memory, not naturally tenacious, improved with
practice. Exercise sharpened my wits. In a few weeks I was promoted to a higher class. In less
than two months I was allowed to commence French and drawing. I learned the first two tenses of the
verb etre, and sketched my first cottage, whose walls, by the by, outriled and sloped those of
leaning tower of Pisa on the same day. That night, on going to bed, I forgot to prepare
in imagination the barma-sized supper of hot roast potatoes, or white bread and new milk,
with which I was wont to amuse my inward cravings. I feasted instead on the spectacle of ideal
drawings, which I saw in the dark, all the work of my own hands, freely penciled houses and trees,
picture-esque rocks and ruins, cup-like groups of cattle, sweet paintings of butterflies
hovering over unblown roses, of birds picking at ripe cherries, of wren's nests
and closing pearl-like eggs, wreathed about with young ivy sprays. I examined, too, in thought,
the possibility of my ever being able to translate currently a certain little French story which Madame
Perrault had that day shown me, nor was that problem solved to my satisfaction ere I fell
than a stalled ox and hatred therewith. I would not now have exchanged Lowood
with all its pervations for Gateshead and its daily luxuries.
But the pervations, or rather the hardships, of Lowood lessened. Spring drew on. She was indeed
already come. The frost of winter had ceased. Its snows were melted. Its cutting winds ameliorated.
My rigid feet, flayed and swollen to lameness by the sharp air of January, began to heal and
subside under the gentler breathings of April. The nights and mornings, no longer by their
Canadian temperature froze the very blood in our veins, we could now endure the play hour passed
in the garden. Sometimes, on a sunny day, it began even to be pleasant and genial, and a
greenness grew over those brown beds, which, freshening daily, suggested the thought that
traversed them at night, and left each morning brighter traces of her steps. Flowers peeped out
amongst the leaves, snowdrops, crocuses, purple arulaculas, and golden-eyed pansies. On Thursday
afternoons, half holidays, we now took walks, and found still sweeter flowers opening by the
side, under the hedges. I discovered, too, that a great pleasure, an enjoyment which the horizon
only bounded, lay all outside the high and spiked guarded walls of our garden. This pleasure
consisted in prospect of noble summits girdling a great hill hollow, rich in verdure and shadow,
in a bright beck full of dark stones and sparkling eddies. How different had this scene looked when
I viewed it laid out beneath the iron sky of winter, stiffened in frost, shrouded with snow.
When mist as chill as death wandered to the impulse of east winds along those purple peaks,
and rolled down Ing and Holm till they blended with the frozen fog of the beck. That beck itself
was then a torrent, turbid and curbless. It tore asunder the wood, and sent a raving sound through
the air, often thickened with wild rain or whirling sleet. And for the forest on its banks, that showed
only ranks of skeletons. April advanced to May, a bright serene May it was. Days of blue sky,
placid sunshine, and soft western or southern gales filled up its duration, and now vegetation
matured with vigor. Lowood shook loose its tresses. It became all green, all flowery. Its great elm,
ash and oak skeletons were restored to majestic life. Woodland plants sprang up profusely in its
unnumbered varieties of moss filled its hollows, and it made a strange ground sunshine out of the
wealth of its wild primrose plants. I have seen their pale gold gleam in overshadowed spots like
scatterings of the sweetest luster. All this I enjoyed often and fully, free, unwatched,
and almost alone. For this unwanted liberty and pleasure, there was a cause, to which it now
becomes my task to advert. Have I not described a pleasant sight for a dwelling, when I speak of it
as bosomed in del and wood, and rising from the verge of a stream? Assuredly pleasant enough,
but whether healthy or not is another question. That forest del where Lowood lay was the cradle
of fog and fog-bred pestilence, which quickening with a quickening spring crept into the orphan
asylum, breathed typhus through its crowded schoolroom and dormitory, and air may arrived
transformed the seminary into a hospital. Semi-starvation and neglected colds had
predisposed most of the pupils to receive infection. Forty-five out of the eighty girls
lay ill at one time. Classes were broken up, rules relaxed. The few who continued well were allowed
almost unlimited license, because the medical attendant insisted on the necessity of frequent
exercise to keep them in health, and had it been otherwise, no one had leisure to watch or restrain
them. Miss Temple's whole attention was absorbed by the patients. She lived in the sickroom,
never quitting it except to snatch a few hours' rest at night. The teachers were fully occupied
with packing up and making other necessary preparations for the departure of those girls
who were fortunate enough to have friends and relations able and willing to remove them from
the seat of contagion. Many, already smitten, went home only to die. Some died at the school,
and were buried quietly and quickly, the nature of the malady forbidding delay.
While disease had thus become an inhabitant of Lowood and death its frequent visitor,
while there was gloom and fear within its walls, while its rooms and passages steamed with hospital
smells, the drug and the past still striving mainly to overcome the effluvia of mortality,
that bright May shone unclouded over the bold hills and beautiful woodland out of doors. Its
opened. Tulips and roses were in bloom. The borders of the little beds were gay with pink
thrift and crimson double daisies. The sweetbriars gave out, morning and evening, their scent of
spice and apples. For these fragrant treasures were all useless for most of the inmates of Lowood,
except to furnish now and then a handful of herbs and blossoms to put in a coffin.
But I, and the rest who continued well, enjoyed fully the beauties of the scene and season. They
let us ramble in the wood like gypsies from morning till night. We did what we liked,
went where we liked. We lived better, too. Mr. Brocklehurst and family never came near Lowood
now. Household matters were not scrutinized into. The cross-housekeeper was gone, driven away by the
fear of infection. Her successor, who had been matron at the Lowood dispensary, unused to the
ways of her new abode, provided with comparative liberality. Besides, there were fewer to feed.
The sick could eat little. Our breakfast basins were better filled. When there was no time to
prepare a regular dinner, which often happened, she would give us a large piece of cold pie,
or a thick slice of bread and cheese. And this we carried away with us to the wood,
where we each chose the spot we liked best, and dined sumptuously. My favorite seat was a
smooth and broad stone, rising white and dry from the very middle of the beck, and only to be got
at by wading through the water, a feat I accomplished barefoot. The stone was just broad enough to
accommodate, comfortably, another girl and me. At that time my chosen comrade, one Mary Anne Wilson,
a shrewd, observant personage, whose society I took pleasure in, partly because she was witty
and original, and partly because she had a manner which set me at my ease. Some years older than I,
she knew more of the world, and could tell me many things I liked to hear. With her,
my curiosity found gratification. To my faults also she gave ample indulgence, never imposing
curb or rain on anything I said. She had a turn for narrative, I for analysis. She liked to inform,
I to question. So we got on swimmingly together, deriving much entertainment, if not much
improvement, from our mutual intercourse. And where, meantime, was Helen Burns? Why did I not
spend these sweet days of liberty with her? Had I forgotten her? Or was I so worthless as to have
grown tired of her pure society? Surely the Mary Anne Wilson I have mentioned was inferior to my
first acquaintance. She could only tell me amusing stories, and reciprocate any racy and pungent
gossip I chose to indulge in, while, if I had spoken truth of Helen, she was qualified to give
those who enjoyed the privilege of her converse a taste of far higher things. True, reader,
and I knew and felt this. And though I am a defective being, with many faults and few
redeeming points, yet I never tired of Helen Burns, nor even ceased to cherish for her a sentiment
of attachment, as strong, tender, and respectful as any that ever animated my heart. How could
it be otherwise when Helen, at all times and under all circumstances, evinced for me a quiet
and faithful friendship, which ill humor never soured, nor irritation never troubled? But Helen
was ill at present. For some weeks she had been removed from my sight, till I knew not what room
upstairs. She was not, I was told, in the hospital portion of the house with the fever patients.
For her complaint was consumption, not typhus. And by consumption I, in my ignorance,
understood something mild, which time and care would be sure to alleviate.
I was confirmed in this idea by the fact of her once or twice coming downstairs on very warm,
sunny afternoons, and being taken by Miss Temple into the garden. But on these occasions I was not
allowed to go and speak to her. I only saw her from the schoolroom window, and then, not distinctly,
for she was much wrapped up, and sat at a distance under the veranda.
One evening, in the beginning of June, I had stayed out very late with Mary Anne in the wood.
We had, as usual, separated ourselves from the others, and had wandered off far, so far that we
lost our way, and had to ask it at a lonely cottage, where a man and woman lived, who looked after a
of half-wild swine that fed on the mast in the wood. When we got back, it was after moonrise,
a pony, which we knew to be the surgeon's, was standing at the garden door. Mary Anne remarked
that she supposed someone must be very ill, as Mr. Bates had been sent for at that time of the
evening. She went into the house. I stayed behind a few minutes to plant in my garden
a handful of roots I had dug up in the forest, in which I feared would wither if I left them
till the morning. This done, I lingered yet a little longer. The flowers smelt so sweet
as the dew fell. It was such a pleasant evening, so serene, so warm. The still-glowing west promised
so fairly another fine day on the morrow. The moon rose with such majesty in the grave east.
I was noting these things and enjoying them as a child might, when it entered my mind as it had
never done before. How sad to be lying now on a sickbed, and to be in danger of dying.
This world is pleasant. It would be dreary to be called from it, and to have to go who knows where.
And then my mind made its first earnest effort to comprehend what had been infused into it,
concerning heaven and hell, and for the first time it recoiled, baffled, and for the first time
glancing behind on each side, and before it, it saw all round an unfathomed gulf. It felt the one
point where it stood, the present. All the rest was formless cloud and vacant depth, and it shuddered
the thought of tottering and plunging amid the chaos. While pondering this new idea, I heard the
front door open. Mr. Bates came out, and with him was a nurse. After she had seen him mount his horse
and depart, she was about to close the door, but I ran up to her. How is Helen Burns?
Very poorly was the answer. Is it her Mr. Bates has been to see? Yes. And what does he say about her?
He says she'll not be here long. This phrase, uttered in my hearing yesterday, would have only
conveyed the notion that she was about to be removed to Northumberland, to her own home.
I should not have suspected that it meant she was dying, but I knew instantly now. It opened clear
on my comprehension that Helen Burns was numbering her last days in this world, and that she was
going to be taken to the region of spirits, if such region there were. I experienced a shock of
horror, then a strong thrill of grief, then a desire, a necessity to see her, and I asked in
what room she lay. She is in Miss Temple's room, said the nurse. May I go up and speak to her?
Oh no, child, it is not likely, and now it is time for you to come in.
You'll catch the fever if you stop out when the dew is falling.
The nurse closed the front door. I went in by the side entrance, which led to the school room.
I was just in time. It was nine o'clock, and Miss Miller was calling the pupils to go to bed.
It might be two hours later, probably near eleven, when I, not having been able to fall asleep,
and deeming from the perfect silence of the dormitory, that my companions were all wrapped
in profound repose, rose softly, put on my frock over my nightdress, and without shoes,
crept from the apartment, and set off in quest of Miss Temple's room.
It was quite at the other end of the house, but I knew my way, and the light of the unclouded
summer moon entering here and there at passage windows enabled me to find it without difficulty.
An odor of camphor and burnt vinegar warned me when I came near the fever room,
and I passed its door quickly, fearful lest the nurse who sat up all night should hear me.
I dreaded being discouraged and sent back, for I must see Helen. I must embrace her before she died.
I must give her one last kiss, exchange with her one last word.
Having descended a staircase, traversed a portion of the house below,
and succeeded in opening and shutting, without noise, two doors, I reached another flight of
steps. These I mounted, and then, just opposite to me, was Miss Temple's room. A light shone
through the keyhole, and from under the door, a profound stillness pervaded the vicinity.
Coming near, I found the door slightly ajar, probably to admit some fresh air into the
abode of sickness. Indisposed to hesitate, and full of impatient impulses,
soul and senses quivering with keen throws, I put it back and looked in. My eye sought Helen,
and feared to find death. Close by Miss Temple's bed, and half covered with its white curtains,
there stood a little crib. I saw the outline of a form under the clothes,
but the face was hid by the hangings. The nurse I had spoken to in the garden sat in an easy chair,
asleep. An unsnuffed candle burnt dimly on the table. Miss Temple was not to be seen.
I knew afterwards that she had been called to a delirious patient in the fever room.
I advanced, then paused by the crib side. My hand was on the curtain, but I preferred speaking
before I withdrew it. I still recoiled at the dread of seeing a corpse.
Helen, I whispered softly, are you awake? She stirred herself, put back the curtain,
and I saw her face, pale, wasted, but quite composed.
She looked so little changed that my fear was instantly dissipated.
Can it be you, Jane? She asked in her own gentle voice. Oh, I thought, she is not going to die.
They are mistaken. She could not speak and look so calmly if she were.
I got onto her crib and kissed her. Her forehead was cold and her cheek both cold and thin,
and so were both her hand and wrist, but she smiled as of old.
Why are you come here, Jane? It is past eleven o'clock. I heard it strike some minutes since.
I came to see you, Helen. I heard you were very ill, and I could not sleep till I had spoken to
you. You came to bid me good-bye, then. You were just in time, probably.
Are you going somewhere, Helen? Are you going home? Yes, to my long home, my last home.
No, no, Helen. I stopped, distressed. While I tried to devour my tears, a fit of coughing seized
Helen. It did not, however, wake the nurse. When it was over, she lay some minutes exhausted.
Then she whispered,
Jane, your little feet are bare. Lie down and cover yourself with my quilt.
I did so. She put her arm over me, and I nestled close to her.
After a long silence, she resumed, still whispering,
I am very happy, Jane, and when you hear that I am dead, you must be sure and not grieve.
There is nothing to grieve about. We almost die one day, and the illness which is removing me
is not painful. It is gentle and gradual. My mind is at rest. I leave no one to regret me much.
I have only a father, and he is lately married, and will not miss me. By dying young,
I shall escape great sufferings. I had not qualities or talents to make my way very well
in the world. I should have been continually at fault. But where are you going to, Helen?
Can you see? Do you know? I believe I have faith I am going to God.
Where is God? What is God? My Maker and yours, who will never destroy what He created,
I rely implicitly on His power and confide wholly in His goodness. I count the hours
till that eventful One arrives, which shall restore me to Him, reveal Him to me.
You are sure, then, Helen, that there is such a place as heaven, and that our souls can get
to it when we die? I am sure there is a future state. I believe God is good. I can resign my
immortal part to Him without any misgiving. God is my Father. God is my Friend. I love Him.
I believe He loves me. And shall I see you again, Helen, when I die?
You will come to the same region of happiness, be received by the same mighty universal parent.
No doubt, dear Jane. Again I questioned, but this time only in thought.
Where is that region? Does it exist? And I clasped my arms closer around heaven.
She seemed dearer to me than ever. I felt as if I could not let her go. I lay with my face hidden
on her neck. Presently, she said, in the sweetest tone, how comfortable I am. That last bit of
coughing has tired me a little. I feel as if I could sleep. But don't leave me, Jane. I like
to have you near me. I'll stay with you, dear Helen. No one shall take me away. Are you warm, darling?
Yes. Good night, Jane. Good night, Helen. She kissed me and I her, and we both soon slumbered.
When I awoke, it was day. An unusual movement roused me. I looked up. I was in somebody's arms.
The nurse held me. She was carrying me back through the passage to the dormitory. I was not
reprimanded for leaving my bed. People had something else to think about. No explanation
was afforded then to my many questions. But a day or two afterwards, I learned that Miss Temple,
on returning to her own room at dawn, had found me laid in the little crib, my face against Helen
shoulders, my arm around her neck. I was asleep and Helen was dead.
Her grave is in Brockle Bridge Churchyard. For fifteen years after her death, it was only
covered by a grassy mound. But now a gray marble tablet marks the spot, inscribed with her name
and the word RASARGAM.
X.
Hitherto I have recorded in detail the events of my insignificant existence.
To the first ten years of my life I have given almost as many chapters.
But this is not to be a regular autobiography.
I am only bound to invoke memory where I know her responses will possess some degree of interest.
Therefore, I now pass a space of eight years almost in silence.
A few lines only are necessary to keep up the length of connection.
When the typhus fever had fulfilled its mission of devastation at Lowood, it gradually disappeared from thence.
But not till its virulence and the number of its victims had drawn public attention on the school.
Inquiry was made into the origin of the scourge.
And by degrees various facts came out which excited public indignation in a high degree.
The unhealthy nature of the site, the quantity and quality of the children's food,
the brackish, fetid water used in its preparation, the pupils' wretched clothing and accommodations.
All these things were discovered.
And the discovery produced a result more defined to Mr. Brocklehurst, but beneficial to the institution.
Several wealthy and benevolent individuals in the county
subscribed largely for the erection of a more convenient building and a better situation.
New regulations were made. Improvements in diet and clothing introduced.
The funds of the school were entrusted to the management of a committee.
Mr. Brocklehurst, who, from his wealth and family connections, could not be overlooked,
still retained the post of treasurer.
But he was aided in the discharge of his duties by gentlemen of rather more enlarged and sympathizing minds.
His office of inspector, too, was shared by those who knew how to combine reason with strictness,
comfort with economy, compassion with uprightness.
The school, thus improved, became in time a truly useful and noble institution.
I remained an inmate of its walls, after its regeneration, for eight years.
Six as pupil and two as teacher.
And in both capacities I bear my testimony to its value and importance.
During these eight years my life was uniform, but not unhappy.
Because it was not inactive, I had the means of an excellent education placed within my reach.
A fondness for some of my studies, and a desire to excel in all,
together with a great delight in pleasing my teachers, especially such as I loved, urged me on.
I availed myself fully of the advantages offered me.
In time I rose to be the first girl of the first class.
Then I was invested with the office of teacher, which I discharged with zeal for two years.
But at the end of that time I altered.
Miss Temple, through all changes, had thus far continued superintendent of the seminary.
To her instruction I owed the best part of my acquirements.
Her friendship and society had been my continual solace.
She had stood me in the stead of mother, governess, and latterly companion.
At this period she married, removed with her husband, a clergyman, an excellent man,
almost worthy of such a wife, to a distant county, and consequently was lost to me.
From the day she left I was no longer the same.
With her was gone every settled feeling, every association that had made Lowood in some degree a home to me.
I had imbibed from her something of her nature and much of her habits.
More harmonious thoughts.
What seemed better regulated feelings had become the inmates of my mind.
I had given in allegiance to duty and order.
I was quiet.
I believed I was content.
To the eyes of others, usually even to my own, I appeared a disciplined and subdued character.
But destiny, in the shape of the Reverend Mr. Nazmuth, came between me and Miss Temple.
I saw her in her travelling dress step into a post-chase shortly after the marriage ceremony.
I watched the chase mount the hill and disappear beyond its brow, and then retired to my own room.
And there spent in solitude the greatest part of the half-holiday granted in honour of the occasion.
I walked about the chamber most of the time.
I imagined myself only to be regretting my loss, and thinking how to repair it.
But when my reflections were concluded, and I looked up and found that the afternoon was gone and evening far advanced,
another discovery dawned on me, namely, that in the interval I had undergone a transforming process,
that my mind had put off all that had borrowed from Miss Temple,
or rather that she had taken with her the serene atmosphere I had been breathing in her vicinity,
and that now I was left in my natural element and beginning to feel the stirring of old emotions.
It did not seem as if a prop were withdrawn, but rather as if a motive were gone.
It was not the power to be tranquil, which had failed me.
But the reason for tranquillity was no more.
My world had for some years been in Lowood.
My experience had been of its rules and systems.
Now I remembered that the real world was wide, and that a varied field of hopes and fears,
of sensations and excitements, awaited those who had courage to go forth into its expanse,
to seek real knowledge of life amidst its perils.
I went to my window, opened it, and looked out.
There were the two wings of the building.
There was the garden.
There were the skirts of Lowood.
There was a hilly horizon.
My eye passed all other objects to rest on those most remote, the blue peaks.
It was those I longed to surmount.
All within their boundary of rock and heath seemed prison ground, exile limits.
I traced the white road winding round the base of one mountain, and vanishing in a gorge between two.
How I longed to follow it farther.
I recall the time when I had traveled that very road in a coach.
I remembered descending that hill at twilight.
An age seemed to have elapsed since the day which brought me first to Lowood.
And I had never quitted it since.
My vacations had all been spent at school.
Mrs. Reed had never sent for me to Gateshead.
Neither she nor any of her family had ever been to visit me.
I had had no communication by letter or message with the outer world.
School rules, school duties, school habits and notions and voices and faces and phrases and costumes and preferences and antipathies.
Such was what I knew of existence, and now I felt that it was not enough.
I tired of the routine of eight years in one afternoon.
I desired liberty.
For liberty I gasped.
For liberty I uttered a prayer.
It seemed scattered on the wind, then faintly blowing.
I abandoned it and framed a humbler supplication.
For change, stimulus.
That petition, too, seemed swept off into vague space.
Then I cried, half-desperate.
Grant me at least a new servitude.
Here a bell, ringing the hour of supper, called me downstairs.
I was not free to resume the interrupted chain of my reflections till bedtime.
Even then a teacher, who occupied the same room with me, kept me from the subject to which I longed to recur.
By a prolonged effusion of small talk.
How I wished sleep would silence her.
It seemed as if, could I but go back to the idea which had last entered my mind as I stood at the window, some inventive suggestion would rise for my relief.
Miss Grice snored at last.
She was a heavy Welsh woman.
Until now her habitual nasal strains had never been regarded by me in any other light than as a nuisance.
Tonight I hailed the first deep notes with satisfaction.
I was debarassed of interruption.
My half-effaced thought instantly revived.
A new servitude.
There is something in that, I soliloquized, mentally, be it understood, I did not talk aloud.
I know there is, because it does not sound too sweet.
It is not like such words as liberty, excitement, enjoyment.
Delightful sounds truly, but no more than sounds for me.
And so hollow and fleeting that it is mere waste of time to listen to them.
But servitude, that must be matter of fact.
Anyone may serve.
I have served here eight years.
Now all I want is to serve elsewhere.
Can I not get so much of my own will?
Is not the thing feasible?
Yes, yes, the end is not so difficult, if I had only a brain active enough to ferret out the means of attaining it.
I sat up in bed, by way of arousing this said brain.
It was a chilly night.
I covered my shoulders with a shawl, and then I proceeded to think again with all my might.
What do I want?
A new place, in a new house, amongst new faces, under new circumstances.
I want this because it is of no use wanting anything better.
How do people do to get a new place?
They apply to friends, I suppose.
I have no friends.
There are many others who have no friends, who must look about for themselves and be their own helpers.
And what is their resource?
I could not tell.
Nothing answered me.
I then ordered my brain to find a response, and quickly.
It worked and worked faster.
I felt the pulses throb in my head and temples, but for nearly an hour it worked in chaos, and no result came of its efforts.
Feverish with vain labor, I got up and took a turn in the room, undrew the curtain, noted a star or two, shivered with cold, and again crept to bed.
A kind fairy, in my absence, had surely dropped the required suggestion on my pillow, for as I lay down it came quietly and naturally to my mind.
Those who want situations advertised, you must advertise in the blank share herald.
How?
I know nothing about advertising.
Replies rose smooth and prompt now.
You must enclose the advertisement and the money to pay for it under a cover directed to the editor of the herald.
You must put it, the first opportunity you have, into the post at Loughton.
Answers must be addressed to J. E. at the post office there.
You can go and inquire in about a week after you send your letter, if any are come, and act accordingly.
The scheme I went over twice, thrice, it was then digested in my mind.
I had it in a clear, practical form.
I felt satisfied and fell asleep.
With earliest day I was up.
I had my advertisement written, enclosed, and directed before the bell rang to rouse the school.
It ran thus.
A young lady accustomed to tuition, had I not been a teacher two years?
Is desirous of meeting with a situation in a private family where the children are under fourteen.
I thought that as I was barely eighteen, it would not do to undertake the guidance of pupils near my own age.
She is qualified to teach the usual branches of a good English education, together with French, drawing, and music.
In those days, reader, this now narrow catalogue of accomplishments would have been held tolerably comprehensive.
This document remained locked in my drawer all day.
After tea, I asked leave of the new superintendent to go to Loughton,
in order to perform some small commissions for myself and one or two of my fellow teachers.
Permission was readily granted.
I went.
It was a walk of two miles, and the evening was wet, but the days were still long.
I visited a shop or two, slipped the letter into the post office, and came back, through heavy rain,
with streaming garments, but with a relieved heart.
The succeeding week seemed long.
It came to an end at last, however, like all subluninary things,
and once more, towards the end of a pleasant autumn day, I found myself afoot on the road to Loughton.
A picturesque track it was, by the way, lying along the side of the beck, and through the sweetest curves of the dale.
But that day I thought more of the letters, that might or might not be awaiting me at the little bur,
whither I was bound, than of the charms of lee and water.
My ostensible errand on this occasion was to get measured for a pair of shoes.
So I discharged that business first, and when it was done,
I stepped across the clean and quiet little street from the shoemaker's to the post office.
It was kept by an old dame, who wore horned spectacles on her nose and black mittens on her hands.
Are there any letters for J.E.? I asked.
She peered at me over her spectacles, and then she opened a drawer and fumbled among its contents for a long time,
so long that my hopes began to falter.
At last, having held a document before her glasses for nearly five minutes,
she presented it across the counter, accompanying the act by another inquisitive and mistrustful glance.
It was for J.E.
Is there only one? I demanded.
There are no more, said she, and I put it back in my pocket and turned my face homeward.
I could not open it then. Rules obliged me to be back by eight, and it was already half past seven.
Various duties awaited me on my arrival.
I had to sit with the girls during their hour of study.
Then it was my turn to read prayers, to see them to bed.
Afterwards, I supped with the other teachers.
Even when we finally retired for the night, the inevitable Miss Grice was still my companion.
We had only a short end of candle in our candlestick, and I dreaded lest she should talk till it was all burnt out.
Fortunately, however, the heavy supper she had eaten produced a soporific effect.
She was already snoring before I had finished undressing.
There still remained an inch of candle.
I now took out my letter.
The seal was an initial F. I broke it.
The contents were brief.
If J. E., who advertised in the Blankshire Herald of last Thursday, possesses the requirements mentioned,
and if she is in a position to give satisfactory references as to character and competency,
a situation can be offered her where there is but one pupil, a little girl, under ten years of age,
and where the salary is thirty pounds per annum.
J. E. is requested to send references, name, address, and all particulars to the direction
Mrs. Fairfax, Thornfield, near Millcote, Blankshire.
I examined the document long.
The writing was old-fashioned and rather uncertain, like that of an elderly lady.
This circumstance was satisfactory.
A private fear had haunted me, that in thus acting for myself, and by my own guidance,
I ran the risk of getting into some scrape, and above all things,
I wished the result of my endeavours to be respectable, proper, en rigale.
I now felt that an elderly lady was no bad ingredient in the business I had on hand.
Mrs. Fairfax. I saw her in a black gown and widow's cap.
Frigid, perhaps, but not uncivil.
A model of elderly English respectability. Thornfield.
That, doubtless, was the name of her house.
A neat, orderly spot, I was sure, though I failed in my efforts to conceive a correct plan of the premises.
Millcote, Blankshire.
I brushed up my recollection of the map of England. Yes, I saw it. Both the Shire and the town.
Blankshire was seventy miles nearer London than the remote county where I now resided.
That was a recommendation to me.
I longed to go where there was life and movement.
Millcote was a large manufacturing town on the blanks of the A-Blank.
A busy place enough, doubtless.
So much the better. It would be a complete change, at least.
Not that my fancy was much captivated by the idea of long chimneys and clouds of smoke.
But, I argued, Thornfield will, probably, be a good way from the town.
Here the socket of the candle dropped, and the wick went out.
Next day, new steps were to be taken. My plans could no longer be confined to my own breast.
I must impart them in order to achieve their success.
Having sought and obtained an audience of the superintendent during the noontide recreation,
I told her I had a prospect of getting a new situation where the salary would be double what I now received.
For at Lowood I got only fifteen pounds per annum.
Anne requested she would break the matter for me to Mr. Brocklehurst, or some of the committee,
and ascertain whether they would permit me to mention them as references.
She obligantly consented to act as mediatrix in the matter.
The next day she led the affair before Mr. Brocklehurst,
who said that Mrs. Reed must be written to, as she was my natural guardian.
A note was accordingly addressed to that lady, who returned for answer that,
I might do as I pleased. She had long relinquished all interference in my affairs.
This note went the round of the committee.
And at last, after what appeared to me most tedious delay,
formal leave was given me to better my condition if I could.
Anne and assurance added that as I had always conducted myself well,
both as teacher and pupil at Lowood, a testimonial of character and capacity,
signed by the inspectors of that institution, should forthwith be furnished me.
This testimonial I accordingly received in about a month,
forwarded a copy of it to Mrs. Fairfax, and got that lady's reply,
stating that she was satisfied, and fixing that day fortnight
as a period for my assuming the post of governess in her house.
I now busied myself in preparations.
The fortnight passed rapidly. I had not a very large boardrobe,
though it was adequate to my wants, and the last day sufficed to pack my trunk,
the same I had brought with me eight years ago from Gateshead.
The box was corded, the card nailed on.
In half an hour the carrier was to call for it to take it to Lowton,
whither I myself was to repair at an early hour the next morning to meet the coach.
I had brushed my black, stuff travelling dress,
prepared my bonnet, gloves, and muff,
sought in all my drawers to see that no article was left behind,
and now, having nothing more to do, I sat down and tried to rest.
I could not.
Though I had been on foot all day, I could not now repose an instant.
I was too much excited.
A phase of my life was closing tonight, a new one opening tomorrow.
Impossible to slumber in the interval.
I must watch feverishly while the change was being accomplished.
Miss, said a servant who met me in the lobby,
where I was wandering like a troubled spirit,
a person below wishes to see you.
The carrier, no doubt, I thought, and ran downstairs without inquiry.
I was passing the back parlor or the teacher's sitting room,
the door of which was half open,
to go to the kitchen when someone ran out.
It's her, I am sure.
I could have told her anywhere,
cried the individual who stopped my progress and took my hand.
I looked.
I saw a woman attired like a well-dressed servant,
matronly, yet still young,
very good-looking, with black hair and eyes,
and lively complexion.
Well, who is it? she asked,
in a voice and with a smile I half recognized.
You've not quite forgotten me, I think, Miss Jane.
In another second I was embracing and kissing her rapturously.
Bessie, Bessie, Bessie, was all I had said.
Whereat she half laughed, half cried,
and we both went into the parlor.
By the fire stood a little fellow of three years old
in plaid frock and trousers.
That is my little boy, said Bessie directly.
Then you are married, Bessie?
Yes, nearly five years since to Robert Levin,
a coachman, and I have a little girl besides Bobby there.
That I've christened Jane.
And you don't live at Gateshead?
I live at the lodge the old porter has left.
Well, and how do they all get on?
Tell me everything about them, Bessie,
but sit down first, and Bobby,
come and sit on my knee, will you?
But Bobby preferred sliding over to his mother.
You're not grown so very tall, Miss Jane,
nor so very stout, continued Mrs. Levin.
I dare say they've not kept you too well at school.
Miss Reed is the head and shoulders taller than you are,
and Miss Georgiana would make two of you in breath.
Georgiana is handsome, I suppose, Bessie?
Very.
She went up to London last winter with her mamma,
and there everybody admired her,
and a young lord fell in love with her,
but his relations were against the match,
and what do you think?
He and Miss Georgiana made it up to run away,
but they were found out and stopped.
It was Miss Reed that found them out.
I believe she was envious, and now she and her sister
lead a cat and dog life together.
They are always quarreling.
Well, and what of John Reed?
Oh, he is not doing so well as his mamma could wish.
He went to college, and he got plucked.
I think they call it, and then his uncles wanted him
to be a barrister and study the law,
but he is such a dissipated young man
they will never make much of him, I think.
What does he look like?
He is very tall.
Some people call him a fine-looking young man,
but he has such thick lips.
And Mrs. Reed?
Mrs. looks stout and well enough in the face,
but I think she's not quite easy in her mind.
Mr. John's conduct does not please her.
He spends a deal of money.
Did she send you here, Bessie?
No, indeed, but I have long waited to see you,
and when I heard that there had been a letter from you
and that you were going to another part of the country,
I thought I'd just set off and get a look at you
before you were quite out of my reach.
I am afraid you were disappointed in me, Bessie,
I said this laughing.
I perceived that Bessie's glance,
though it expressed regard,
did in no shape denote admiration.
No, Miss Jane, not exactly.
You are genteel enough.
You look like a lady,
and it is as much as I ever expected of you.
You were no beauty as a child.
I smiled at Bessie's frank answer.
I thought that it was correct,
but I confess I was not quite indifferent to its import.
At eighteen most people wish to please,
and the conviction that they have not an exterior likely to second
that desire brings anything but gratification.
I daresay you were clever, though,
continued Bessie by way of solace.
What can you do?
Can you play on the piano?
A little.
There was one in the room.
Bessie went and opened it,
and then asked me to sit down and give her a tune.
I played a waltz or two,
and she was charmed.
The Miss Reeds could not play as well,
said she exultingly.
I always said you would surpass them in learning,
and can you draw?
That is one of my paintings over the chimney piece.
It was a landscape in watercolours,
of which I had made a present to the superintendent,
in acknowledgement of her obliging mediation with the committee on my behalf,
in which she had framed and glazed.
Well, that is beautiful, Miss Jane.
It is as fine a picture as any Miss Reeds' drawing master could paint,
let alone the fine young ladies themselves,
who could not come near it.
And you have learnt French?
Yes, Bessie.
I can both read it and speak it.
And you can work on muslin and canvas?
I can.
Oh, you were quite a lady, Miss Jane.
I knew you would be.
You will get on whether your relations noticed you or not.
There was something I wanted to ask you.
Have you ever heard anything from your father's kinsfolk?
The heirs?
Never in my life.
Well, you know, Mrs. always said they were poor and quite despicable,
and they may be poor,
but I believe they are as much gentry as the Reeds are.
For one day, nearly seven years ago,
a Mr. Heir came to Gateshead and wanted to see you.
Mrs. said you were at school, fifty miles off.
He seemed so much disappointed, for he could not stay.
He was going on a voyage to a foreign country,
and the ship was to sail from London in a day or two.
He looked quite a gentleman,
and I believe he was your father's brother.
What foreign country was he going to, Bessie?
An island, thousands of miles off, where they make wine.
The butler did tell me.
Madeira, I suggested?
Yes.
That is it.
That is the very word.
So he went?
Yes.
He did not stay many minutes in the house.
Mrs. was very high with him.
She called him afterwards a sneaking tradesman.
My Robert believes he was a wine merchant.
Very likely, I returned,
or perhaps clerk or agent to a wine merchant.
Bessie and I conversed about old times an hour longer,
and then she was obliged to leave me.
I saw her again for a few minutes the next morning at Loughton,
while I was waiting for my coach.
We parted finally at the door of the Brocklehurst Arms there.
Each went her separate way.
She set off for the brow of Lowood Fell.
To meet the conveyance which was to take her back to Gateshead,
I mounted the vehicle which was to bear me to my new duties,
and a new life in the unknown environs of Millcote.
A new chapter in a novel is something like a new scene in a play,
and when I draw up the curtain this time, reader, you must fancy you see a room in the Georgian
at Milkoat, with such large figured papering on the walls as in rooms have, such a carpet,
such furniture, such ornaments on the mantelpiece, such prints, including a portrait of George the
and another of the Prince of Wales, and a representation of the death of Wolf.
All this is visible to you by the light of an oil lamp hanging from the ceiling,
and by that of an excellent fire, near which I sit in my cloak and bonnet,
my muff and umbrella lie on the table, and I am warming away the numbness and chill
contracted by sixteen hours exposure to the rawness of an October day.
I left Lowton at four o'clock a.m., and the Milkoat town clock is now just striking eight.
Reader, though I look comfortably accommodated, I am not very tranquil in my mind.
I thought when the coach stopped here there would be someone to meet me.
I looked anxiously around as I descended the wooden steps, the boots placed for my convenience,
expecting to hear my name pronounced and to see some description of carriage waiting to convey
to Thornfield. Nothing of the sort was visible, and when I asked a waiter if anyone had been to
inquire after a mis-air I was answered in the negative, so I had no recourse but to request
to be shown into a private room, and here I am waiting while all sorts of doubts and fears are
troubling my thoughts. It is a very strange sensation to inexperienced youth to feel itself
quite alone in the world, cut adrift from every connection, uncertain whether the port to which
it is bound can be reached, and prevented by many impediments from returning to that it has quitted.
The charm of adventure sweetens that sensation, the glow of pride warms it, but then the throb
of fear disturbs it, and fear with me became predominant when half an hour elapsed and still
I was alone. I bethought myself to ring the bell.
Is there a place in this neighbourhood called Thornfield? I asked to the waiter who answered
the summons. Thornfield? I don't know, ma'am, I'll inquire at the bar. He vanished but reappeared
instantly. Is your name Air Miss? Yes. Person here waiting for you. I jumped up, took my muffened
umbrella, and hastened into the inn passage. A man was standing by the open door, and in the
lamplit street I dimly saw a one-horse conveyance. This will be your luggage, I suppose, said the
man rather abruptly when he saw me, pointing to my trunk in the passage. Yes. He hoisted it
on to the vehicle, which was a sort of car, and then I got in. Before he shot me up I asked him
how far it was to Thornfield, a matter of six miles. How long shall we be before we get there?
Happen an hour and a half? He fastened the car door, climbed to his own seat outside, and we set
off. Our progress was leisurely and gave me ample time to reflect. I was content to be at length so
near the end of my journey, and as I leaned back in the comfortable though not elegant conveyance
I meditated much at my ease. I suppose, thought I, judging from the plainness of the servant
and carriage, Mrs Fairfax is not a very dashing person. So much the better. I never lived amongst
fine people but once, and I was very miserable with them. I wonder if she lives alone except
for this little girl. If so, and if she is in any degree amiable, I shall surely be able to get on
with her. I will do my best. It is a pity that doing one's best does not always answer. At
Lowood, indeed, I took that resolution, kept it, and succeeded in pleasing. But with Mrs Read,
I remember my best was always spurned with scorn. I pray God Mrs Fairfax may not turn out a second
Mrs Read. But if she does, I'm not bound to stay with her. Let the worst come to the worst,
I can advertise again. How far are we on our road now, I wonder?
I let down the window and looked out. Millcote was behind us. Judging by the number of its lights,
it seemed a place of considerable magnitude, much larger than Lowton. We were now, as far as I could
see, on a sort of common, but there were houses scattered all over the district. I felt we were
in a different region to Lowood, more populous, less picturesque, more stirring, less romantic.
The roads were heavy, the night misty. My conductor let his horse walk all the way,
and the hour and a half extended, I verily believe, to two hours. At last he turned in his seat and
said, You're known so far for Thornfield now. Again I looked out. We were passing a church.
I saw its low broad tower against the sky, and its bell was tolling a quarter. I saw a narrow
galaxy of lights too on a hillside, marking a village or hamlet. About ten minutes after,
the driver got down and opened a pair of gates. We passed through, and they clashed two behind us.
We now slowly ascended a drive and came upon the long front of a house.
Candlelight gleamed from one curtained bow window. All the rest were dark. The car stopped at the
front door. It was opened by a maidservant. I alighted and went in.
Will you walk this way, ma'am? said the girl, and I followed her across a square hall with high doors
all round. She ushered me into a room whose double illumination of fire and candle at first dazzled
me, contrasting as it did with the darkness to which my eyes had groaned for two hours inured.
When I could see, however, a cosy and agreeable picture presented itself to my view.
A snug small room, a round table by a cheerful fire, an armchair high-backed and old-fashioned,
wherein sat the neatest imaginable little elderly lady in widow's cap, black silk gown,
and snowy muslin apron, exactly like what I had fancied Mrs Fairfax,
only less stately and milder looking. She was occupied in knitting. A large cat sat demurely
at her feet. Nothing, in short, was wanting to complete the bow ideal of domestic comfort.
A more reassuring introduction for a new governess could scarcely be conceived.
There was no grandeur to overwhelm, no stateliness to embarrass, and then, as I entered,
the old lady got up and promptly and kindly came forward to meet me.
How do you do, my dear? I am afraid you have had a tedious ride.
John drives so slowly. You must be cold. Come to the fire.
Mrs Fairfax, I suppose, said I. Yes, you are right. Do sit down.
She conducted me to her own chair, and then began to remove my shawl and untie my bonnet strings.
I begged she would not give herself so much trouble.
Oh, it is no trouble. I dare say your own hands are almost numbed with cold.
Leah, make a little hot negus and cut a sandwich or two. Here are the keys of the storeroom.
And she produced from her pocket a most housewifely bunch of keys,
and delivered them to the servant.
Now then, draw nearer to the fire, she continued.
You have brought your luggage with you, haven't you, my dear?
Yes, ma'am. I will see it carried into your room, she said, and bustled out.
She treats me like a visitor, thought I. I little expected such a reception.
I anticipated only coldness and stiffness.
This is not like what I have heard of the treatment of governesses,
but I must not exalt too soon.
She returned, with her own hands, cleared her knitting apparatus and a book or two from the table,
to make room for the tray which Leah now brought, and then herself handed me the refreshments.
I felt rather confused at being the object of more attention than I had ever before received,
and that too shown by my employer and superior.
But as she did not herself seem to consider she was doing anything out of her place,
I thought it better to take her civilities quietly.
Shall I have the pleasure of seeing Miss Fairfax tonight? I asked,
when I had partaken of what she offered me.
What did you say, my dear? I am a little deaf, returned the good lady,
approaching her ear to my mouth.
I repeated the question more distinctly.
Miss Fairfax? Oh, you mean Miss Varens. Varens is the name of your future pupil.
Indeed, then she is not your daughter.
No, I have no family.
I should have followed up my first inquiry by asking in what way Miss Varens was connected
with her, but I recollected it was not polite to ask too many questions.
Besides, I was sure to hear in time.
I am so glad, she continued as she sat down opposite to me
and took the cat on her knee, I am so glad you are come.
It will be quite pleasant living here now with a companion,
to be sure it is pleasant at any time, for Thornfield is a fine old hall,
rather neglected of late years perhaps, but still it is a respectable place.
Yet, you know, in wintertime one feels dreary quite alone in the best quarters.
I say alone, Leah is a nice girl to be sure, and John and his wife are very decent people,
but then you see they are only servants, and one can't converse with them on terms of equality.
One must keep them at a due distance for fear of losing one's authority.
I am sure last winter, it was a very severe one if you recollect, and when it did not snow it
rained and blew, not a creature but the butcher and postman came to the house from November till
February, and I really got quite melancholy with sitting night after night alone.
I had Leah in to read to me sometimes, but I don't think the poor girl liked the task much.
She felt it confining. In spring and summer one got on better, sunshine and long days make such
a difference, and then, just at the commencement of this autumn, little Adela Varens came and her
nurse. A child makes a house alive all at once, and now you are here, I shall be quite gay.
My heart really warmed to the worthy lady as I heard her talk, and I drew my chair a little
nearer to her, and expressed my sincere wish that she might find my company as agreeable as she
anticipated. But I'll not keep you sitting up late tonight, said she. It is on the stroke of
twelve now, and you have been travelling all day. You must feel tired. If you've got your
feet well warmed, I'll show you your bedroom. I've had the room next to mine prepared for you.
It's only a small apartment, but I thought you would like it better than one of the large front
chambers. To be sure they have finer furniture, but they are so dreary and solitary. I never
sleep in them myself. I thanked her for her considerate choice, and as I really felt fatigued
with my long journey, expressed my readiness to retire. She took my candle, and I followed her
from the room. First she went to see if the hall door was fastened. Having taken the key from the
lock, she led the way upstairs. The steps and banisters were evoke. The staircase window was
high and latticed. Both it and the long gallery into which the bedroom doors opened looked as if
they belonged to a church rather than a house. A very chill and vault-like air pervaded the
stairs and gallery, suggesting cheerless ideas of space and solitude, and I was glad when finally
ushered into my chamber to find it of small dimensions and furnished in ordinary modern style.
When Mrs Fairfax had bid me a kind good night, and I had fastened my door, gazed leisurely around,
and in some measure effaced the eerie impression made by that wide hall, that dark and spacious
staircase, and that long cold gallery by the livelier aspect of my little room, I remembered
that, after a day of bodily fatigue and mental anxiety, I was now at last in safe haven.
The impulse of gratitude swelled my heart, and I knelt down at the bedside and offered up thanks
where thanks were due, not forgetting, ere I rose, to implore aid on my further path,
and the power of meriting the kindness which seemed so frankly offered me before it was earned.
My couch had no thorns in it that night, my solitary room no fears. At once weary and
content, I slept soon and soundly. When I awoke, it was broad day. The chamber looked such a bright
little place to me as the sun shone in between the gay blue chintz window curtains, showing
papered walls and a carpeted floor, so unlike the bare planks and stained plaster of low wood
that my spirits rose at the view. Externals have a great effect on the young. I thought
that a fairer era of life was beginning for me, one that was to have its flowers and pleasures
as well as its thorns and toils. My faculties, roused by the change of scene, the new field
offered to hope seemed all a stir. I cannot precisely define what they expected, but it was
something pleasant, not perhaps that day or that month, but at an indefinite future period.
I rose, I dressed myself with care, obliged to be plain, for I had no article of attire that was
not made with extreme simplicity. I was still by nature solicitous to be neat. It was not my habit
to be disregardful of appearance or careless of the impression I made. On the contrary,
I ever wished to look as well as I could and to please as much as my want of beauty would permit.
I sometimes regretted that I was not handsomer. I sometimes wished to have rosy cheeks, a straight
nose, and small cherry mouth. I desired to be tall, stately, and finely developed in figure.
I felt it a misfortune that I was so little, so pale, and had features so irregular and so marked.
And why had I these aspirations and these regrets? It would be difficult to say. I could not then
distinctly say it to myself, yet I had a reason, and a logical natural reason too. However,
when I had brushed my hair very smooth and put on my black frock, which, quaker-like as it was,
at least had the merit of fitting to a nicety, and adjusted my clean white tucker, I thought
I should do respectably enough to appear before Mrs Fairfax, and that my new pupil would not at
least recoil from me with antipathy. Having opened my chamber window and seen that I left all things
straight and neat on the toilet table, I ventured forth. Traversing the long and matted gallery,
I descended the slippery steps of oak. Then I gained the hall. I halted there a minute.
I looked at some pictures on the walls. One, I remember, represented a grim man in a cuirass,
and one a lady with powdered hair and a pearl necklace, and a bronze lamp pendant from the
ceiling, at a great clock whose case was of oak, curiously carved, and ebon black with time and
rubbing. Everything appeared very stately and imposing to me, and then I was so little accustomed
to grandeur. The hall door, which was half of glass, stood open. I stepped over the threshold.
It was a fine autumn morning. The early sun shone serenely on embrowned groves and still
green fields. Advancing on to the lawn, I looked up and surveyed the front of the mansion. It was
three storeys high, of proportions not vast, though considerable, a gentleman's manor house,
not a nobleman's seat. Battlements round the top gave it a picturesque look. Its grey front
stood out well from the background of a rookery, whose cawing tenants were now on the wing.
They flew over the lawn and grounds to alight in a great meadow, from which these were separated
by a sunk fence, and where an array of mighty old thorn-trees, strong, knotty, and broad as oaks,
at once explained the etymology of the mansion's designation. Farther off were hills, not so lofty
as those around Lowood, nor so craggy, nor so like barriers of separation from the living world,
but yet quiet and lonely hills enough, and seeming to embrace Thornfield with a seclusion
I had not expected to find existent so near the stirring locality of Millcote.
A little hamlet, whose roofs were blent with trees, straggled up the side of one of these hills.
The church of the district stood nearer Thornfield. Its old tower top looked over a knoll between the
house and gates. I was yet enjoying the calm prospect and pleasant fresh air, yet listening
with delight to the cawing of the rooks, yet surveying the wide, hoary front of the hall,
and thinking what a great place it was for one lonely little dame like Mrs Fairfax to inhabit,
when that lady appeared at the door.
What, out already? said she. I see you are an early riser.
I went up to her, and was received with an affable kiss and shake of the hand.
How do you like Thornfield? she asked. I told her I liked it very much.
Yes, she said, it is a pretty place, but I fear it will be getting out of order unless Mr Rochester
should take it into his head to come and reside here permanently, or at least visit it rather
oftener. Great houses and fine grounds require the presence of the proprietor.
Mr Rochester? I exclaimed. Who is he?
The owner of Thornfield, she responded quietly. Did you not know he was called Rochester?
Of course I did not. I had never heard of him before, but the old lady seemed to regard his
existence as a universally understood fact, with which everybody must be acquainted by instinct.
I thought, I continued, Thornfield belonged to you.
To me? Bless you, child, what an idea! To me, I am only the housekeeper, the manager.
To be sure, I am distantly related to the Rochesters by the mother's side,
or at least my husband was. He was a clergyman, incumbent of Hay, that little village yonder on
the hill, and that church near the gates was his. The present Mr Rochester's mother was a Fairfax,
and second cousin to my husband, but I never presume on the connection. In fact, it is nothing
to me. I consider myself quite in the light of an ordinary housekeeper. My employer is always civil,
and I expect nothing more. And the little girl, my pupil? She is Mr Rochester's ward.
He commissioned me to find a governess for her. He intended to have her brought up in somethingshire,
I believe. Here she comes, with her bon, as she calls her nurse. The enigma then was explained.
This affable and kind little widow was no great dame, but a dependent like myself. I did not like
her the worse for that. On the contrary, I felt better pleased than ever. The equality between her
and me was real, not the mere result of condescension on her part. So much the better. My position was
all the freer. As I was meditating on this discovery, a little girl, followed by her attendant,
came running up the lawn. I looked at my pupil, who did not at first appear to notice me. She was
quite a child, perhaps seven or eight years old, slightly built, with a pale, small featured face,
and a redundancy of hair falling in curls to her waist.
Good morning, Miss Adelia, said Mrs Fairfax. Come and speak to the lady who is to teach you,
and to make you a clever woman one day. She approached.
C'est le ma gouverneur, she said, pointing at me, and addressing her nurse, who answered.
Mais oui, certainement.
Are they foreigners, I inquired, amazed at hearing the French language?
The nurse is a foreigner, and Adelia was born on the continent, and I believe never left it,
till within six months ago. When she first came here she could speak no English,
now she can make shift to talk it a little. I don't understand her, she mixes it so with French,
but you will make out her meaning very well, I dare say.
Fortunately, I had had the advantage of being taught French by a French lady,
and as I had always made a point of conversing with Madame Pierrot as often as I could,
and had besides during the last seven years learnt a portion of French by heart daily,
applying myself to take pains with my accent, and imitating as closely as possible the
pronunciation of my teacher, I had acquired a certain degree of readiness and correctness
in the language, and was not likely to be much at a loss with Mademoiselle Adela.
She came and shook hands with me when she heard that I was her governess,
and as I led her into breakfast I addressed some phrases to her in her own tongue.
She replied briefly at first, but after we were seated at the table, and she had examined me some
ten minutes with her large hazel eyes, she suddenly commenced chattering fluently.
Ah! cried she in French. You speak my language as well as Mr. Rochester does.
I can talk to you as I can to him, and so can Sophie. She will be glad.
Nobody here understands her. Madame Fairfax is all English. Sophie is my nurse. She came with me over
the sea in a great ship with a chimney that smoked. How it did smoke! And I was sick,
and so was Sophie, and so was Mr. Rochester. Mr. Rochester lay down on a sofa in a pretty room
called the Salon, and Sophie and I had little beds in another place. I nearly fell out of mine.
It was like a shelf. And, mademoiselle, what is your name?
Air. Jane Air.
Air? Bah! I cannot say it. Well, our ship stopped in the morning before it was quite daylight at a
great city, a huge city with very dark houses and all smoky, not at all like the pretty clean town
I came from. And Mr. Rochester carried me in his arms over a plank to the land, and Sophie came
after, and we all got into a coach which took us to a beautiful large house, larger than this and
finer, called an hotel. We stayed there nearly a week. I and Sophie used to walk every day in a
great green place full of trees called the Park, and there were many children there besides me,
and a pond with beautiful birds in it that I fed with crumbs.
Can you understand her when she runs on so fast? asked Mrs. Fairfax. I understood her very well,
for I had been accustomed to the fluent tongue of Madame Pierrot.
I wish, continued the good lady, you could ask her a question or two about her parents.
I wonder if she remembers them. Adèle, I inquired, with whom did you live when
you were in that pretty clean town you spoke of? I lived long ago with Mama,
but she is gone to the Holy Virgin. Mama used to teach me to dance and sing and to say verses.
A great many gentlemen and ladies came to see Mama, and I used to dance before them,
or to sit on their knees and sing to them. I liked it. Shall I let you hear me sing now?
She had finished her breakfast, so I permitted her to give a specimen of her accomplishments.
Descending from her chair, she came and placed herself on my knee.
Then, folding her little hands demurely before her, shaking back her curls and lifting her eyes
to the ceiling, she commenced singing a song from some opera. It was the strain of a forsaken lady
who, after bewailing the perfidy of her lover, calls pride to her aid, desires her attendant
to deck her in her brightest jewels and richest robes, and resolves to meet the false one that
at a ball and prove to him by the gaiety of her demeanour how little his desertion has affected
her. The subject seemed strangely chosen for an infant singer, but I suppose the point of the
exhibition lay in hearing the notes of love and jealousy warbled with the lisp of childhood,
and in very bad taste that point was, at least I thought so.
Adelle sang the canzonette tunefully enough and with the naivety of her age.
This achieved, she jumped from my knee and said,
Now, mademoiselle, I will repeat you some poetry.
Assuming an attitude, she began,
and then, declaiming the little piece with an attention to punctuation and emphasis,
a flexibility of voice and an appropriateness of gesture very unusual indeed at her age,
and which proved she had been carefully trained.
Was it your mamma who taught you that piece, I asked?
Yes, and she just used to say it in this way,
and she made me lift my hand so to remind me to raise my voice at the question.
Now shall I dance for you? No, that will do.
But after your mamma went to the Holy Virgin, as you say, with whom did you live then?
With Madame Frederique and her husband. She took care of me, but she is nothing related to me.
I think she is poor, for she had not so fine a house as mamma.
I was not long there. Mr. Rochester asked me if I would like to go and live with him in England,
and I said yes, for I knew Mr. Rochester before I knew Madame Frederique,
and he was always kind to me and gave me pretty dresses and toys.
But you see he has not kept his word, for he has brought me to England,
and now he has gone back again himself, and I never see him.
After breakfast, Adele and I withdrew to the library,
which room, it appears, Mr. Rochester had directed should be used as the schoolroom.
Most of the books were locked up behind glass doors, but there was one bookcase left open,
containing everything that could be needed in the way of elementary works,
and several volumes of light literature, poetry, biography, travels, a few romances, etc.
I suppose he had considered that these were all the governess would require for her private
perusal, and indeed they contented me amply for the present. Compared with the scanty pickings
I had now and then been able to glean at Lowood, they seemed to offer an abundant harvest of
entertainment and information. In this room too there was a cabinet piano, quite new and of
superior tone, also an easel for painting and a pair of globes. I found my pupil sufficiently docile,
though disinclined to apply. She had not been used to regular occupation of any kind. I felt
it would be injudicious to confine her too much at first, so when I had talked to her a great deal
and got her to learn a little, and when the morning had advanced to noon, I allowed her
to return to her nurse. I then proposed to occupy myself till dinner time in drawing
some little sketches for her use. As I was going upstairs to fetch my portfolio and pencils,
Mrs Fairfax called to me.
Your morning school hours are over now, I suppose, said she. She was in a room,
the folding doors of which stood open. I went in when she addressed me. It was a large,
stately apartment with purple chairs and curtains, a turkey carpet, walnut-panelled walls,
one vast window rich in slanted glass, and a lofty ceiling nobly moulded. Mrs Fairfax was
dusting some vases, a fine purple spar which stood on a sideboard.
What a beautiful room, I exclaimed as I looked round, for I had never before seen any half so
imposing. Yes, this is the dining room. I have just opened the window to let in a little air
and sunshine, for everything gets so damp in apartments that are seldom inhabited.
The drawing room yonder feels like a vault. She pointed to a wide arch corresponding to the window
and hung like it with a Tyrian dyed curtain, now looped up.
Mounting to it by two broad steps and looking through, I thought I caught a glimpse of a fairy
place, so bright to my novice eyes appeared the view beyond. Yet it was merely a very pretty
drawing room, and within it a boudoir, both spread with white carpets on which seemed laid
brilliant garlands of flowers, both sealed with snowy mouldings of white grapes and vine leaves,
beneath which glowed in rich contrast crimson couches and ottomans, while the ornaments on the
pale Parisian mantelpiece were of sparkling bohemian glass, ruby red, and between the windows
large mirrors repeated the general blending of snow and fire.
In what order you keep these rooms, Mrs Fairfax, said I, no dust, no canvas coverings,
except that the air feels chilly one would think they were inhabited daily.
Why, Miss Eyre, though Mr Rochester's visits here are rare, they are always sudden and unexpected,
and as I observed that it put him out to find everything swathed up,
and to have a bustle of arrangement on his arrival, I thought it best to keep the rooms
in readiness. Is Mr Rochester an exacting, fastidious sort of man? Not particularly so,
but he has a gentleman's tastes and habits, and he expects to have things managed in conformity to
them. Do you like him? Is he generally liked? Oh, yes, the family have always been respected
here. Almost all the land in this neighbourhood, as far as you can see, has belonged to the
Rochester's time out of mind. Well, but leaving his land out of the question, do you like him?
Is he liked for himself? I have no course to do otherwise than like him, and I believe he
is considered a just and liberal landlord by his tenants, but he has never lived much among them.
But has he no peculiarities? What, in short, is his character? Oh, his character is unimpeachable,
I suppose. He is rather peculiar, perhaps. He has travelled a great deal and seen a great deal of
the world, I should think. I dare say he is clever, but I never had much conversation with him.
In what way is he peculiar? I don't know. It is not easy to describe.
Nothing striking, but you feel it when he speaks to you. You cannot be always sure whether he is
ingest or earnest, whether he is pleased or the contrary. You don't thoroughly understand him,
in short. At least I don't. But it is of no consequence. He is a very good master.
This was all the account I got from Mrs Fairfax of her employer and mine.
There are people who seem to have no notion of sketching a character,
or observing and describing salient points, either in persons or things.
The good lady evidently belonged to this class. My queries puzzled, but did not draw her out.
Mr Rochester was Mr Rochester in her eyes. A gentleman, a landed proprietor, nothing more.
She inquired and searched no further, and evidently wandered at my wish to gain a more
definite notion of his identity. When we left the living room, she proposed to show me over
the rest of the house, and I followed her upstairs and downstairs, admiring as I went,
for all was well arranged and handsome. The large front chambers I thought especially grand,
and some of the third story rooms, though dark and low, were interesting from their air of
antiquity. The furniture once appropriated to the lower apartments had from time to time been
removed here, as fashions changed, and the imperfect light entering by their narrow casement
showed bedsteads of a hundred years old, chests in oak or walnut, looking with their strange
of palm branches and cherub's heads, like types of the Hebrew ark, rows of venerable chairs,
high-backed and narrow, stools still more antiquated, on whose cushioned tops were
yet apparent traces of half-effaced embroideries wrought by fingers that for two generations had
been coffin dust. All these relics gave to the third story of Thornfield Hall the aspect of a
bloom of the past, a shrine of memory. I liked the hush, the gloom, the quaintness of these
retreats in the day, but I by no means coveted a night's repose on one of those wide and heavy
beds, shut in some of them with doors of oak, shaded others with wrought old English hangings
crusted with thick work, portraying effigies of strange flowers and stranger birds and
strangest human beings, all which would have looked strange indeed by the pallid gleam of moonlight.
Do the servants sleep in these rooms? I asked. No, they occupy a range of smaller apartments
to the back. No one ever sleeps here. One would almost say that if there were a ghost in Thornfield
Hall this would be its haunt. So I think you have no ghosts then? None that I ever heard of,
returned Mrs Fairfax, smiling. Nor any traditions of one? No legends or ghost stories?
I believe not. And yet it is said the Rochester's have been rather a violent, rather than a quiet
race in their time. Perhaps, though, that is the reason they rest tranquilly in their graves now.
Yes, after life's fitful fever they sleep well, I muttered.
Where are you going now, Mrs Fairfax? For she was moving away.
On to the leads. Will you come and see the view from thence?
I followed still, up a very narrow staircase to the attics, and thence by a ladder and through
a trap door to the roof of the hall. I was now on a level with the crow colony and could see into
their nests. Leaning over the battlements and looking far down, I surveyed the grounds laid
out like a map. The bright and velvet lawn closely girdled the grey base of the mansion,
the field wide as a park dotted with its ancient timber, the wood dun and seer divided by a path
visibly overgrown, greener with moss than the trees were with foliage, the church at the gates,
the road, the tranquil hills, all reposing in the autumn day's sun, the horizon bounded by a
vicious sky, azure marbled with pearly white. No feature in the scene was extraordinary,
but all was pleasing. When I turned from it and re-passed the trap door I could scarcely
see my way down the ladder. The attic seemed black as a vault compared with that arch of
blue air to which I had been looking up, and to that sunlit scene of grove, pasture, and green hill
of which the hall was the centre and over which I had been gazing with delight.
Mrs Fairfax stayed behind a moment to fasten the trap door. I, by drift of groping,
found the outlet from the attic and proceeded to descend the narrow garret staircase. I lingered
in the long passage to which this led, separating the front and back rooms of the third story,
narrow, low, and dim, with only one little window at the far end, and looking, with its two rows of
small black doors all shut, like a corridor in some bluebeard's castle. While I paced softly on,
the last sound I expected to hear in so still a region, a laugh struck my ear. It was a curious
laugh, distinct, formal, mirthless. I stopped. The sound ceased, only for an instant. It began
again, louder, for at first, though distinct, it was very low. It passed off in a clamorous
peel that seemed to wake an echo in every lonely chamber, though it originated but in one,
and I could have pointed out the door whence the accents issued.
Mrs Fairfax, I called out, for I now heard her descending the great stairs.
Did you hear that loud laugh? Who is it?
Some of the servants, very likely, she answered. Perhaps Grace Poole.
Did you hear it? I again inquired. Yes, plainly. I often hear her. She sows in one of these rooms.
Perhaps Leah is with her. They are frequently noisy together. The laugh was repeated in its low
syllabic tone and terminated in an odd murmur.
Grace! exclaimed Mrs Fairfax. I really did not expect any Grace to answer, for the laugh was
as tragic as preternatural a laugh as any I have ever heard, and but that it was high noon,
and that no circumstance of ghostliness accompanied the curious cationation,
but that neither scene nor season favoured fear. I should have been superstitiously afraid.
However, the event showed me I was a fool for entertaining a sense even of surprise.
The door nearest me opened, and a servant came out, a woman of between thirty and forty,
a set square-maid figure, red-haired, and with a hard plain face. Any apparition less romantic
or less ghostly could scarcely be conceived. Too much noise, Grace, said Mrs Fairfax. Remember
directions. Grace curtsied silently and went in.
She is a person we have to sow and assist Leah in her housemaid's work,
continued the widow, not altogether unobjectionable in some points, but she does well enough.
By the by, how have you got on with your new pupil this morning?
The conversation, thus turned on Adele, continued till we reached the light and
cheerful region below. Adele came running to meet us in the hall, exclaiming,
We found dinner ready and waiting for us in Mrs Fairfax's room.
The promise of a smooth career, which my first
introduction to Thornfield Hall seemed to pledge, was not belied on a longer acquaintance with
the place and its inmates. Mrs. Fairfax turned out to be what she appeared, a placid-tempered,
kind-natured woman of competent education and average intelligence. My pupil was a lively
child, who had been spoilt and indulged, and therefore was sometimes wayward. But as she
entirely to my care, and no injudicious interference from any quarter ever thwarted my plans for
her improvement, she soon forgot her little freaks, and became obedient and teachable.
She had no great talents, no marked traits of character, no peculiar development of feeling
or taste which raised her one inch above the ordinary level of childhood. But neither had
any deficiency or vice which sunk her below it. She made reasonable progress, entertained for me
a vivacious, though perhaps not very profound, affection, and by her simplicity, gay prattle,
and efforts to please, inspired me, in return, with a degree of attachment sufficient to make
us both content in each other's society. This, par parenthese, will be thought cool language by
persons who entertain solemn doctrines about the angelic nature of children, and the duty
of those charged with their education to conceive for them an idolatrous devotion. But I am
not writing to flatter parental egotism, to echo Kant, or to prop up Humbug. I am merely
telling the truth. I felt a conscientious solicitude for Adele's welfare and progress,
and a quiet liking for her little self, just as I cherished, towards Mrs. Fairfax, a thankfulness
for her kindness, and a pleasure in her society proportionate to the tranquil regard she had
for me, and the moderation of her mind and character. Anybody may blame me who likes,
when I add further that, now and then, when I took a walk by myself in the grounds, when
I went down to the gates, and looked through them along the road, or when, while Adele
played with her nurse, and Mrs. Fairfax made jellies in the storeroom, I climbed the three
staircases, raised the trap-door of the attic, and having reached the leads, looked out afar
over sequestered field and hill, and a long dim skyline, that then I longed for a power
which might overpass that limit, which might reach the busy world, towns, regions full
of life I had heard of, but never seen, that then I desired more of practical experience
than I possessed, more of intercourse with my kind, of acquaintance with a variety of
character, than was here within my reach. I valued what was good in Mrs. Fairfax, and
what was good in Adele, but I believed in the existence of other and more vivid kinds
of goodness, and what I believed in I wished to behold. Who blames me? Many, no doubt,
and I shall be called discontented. I could not help it. The restlessness was in my nature.
It agitated me to pain sometimes. Then my sole relief was to walk along the corridor
of the third story, backwards and forwards, safe in the silence and solitude of the spot,
and allow my mind's eye to dwell on whatever bright visions rose before it, and certainly
they were many and glowing, to let my heart be heaved by the exultant movement which,
while it swelled it in trouble, expanded it with life, and best of all, to open my inward
ear to a tale that was never ended, a tale my imagination created and narrated continuously,
quickened with all of incident, life, fire, feeling, that I desired and had not in my
actual existence.
It is in vain to say human beings ought to be satisfied with tranquillity. They must
have action, and they will make it if they cannot find it. Millions are condemned to
be still a doom than mine, and millions are in silent revolt against their lot. Nobody
knows how many rebellions, besides political rebellions, ferment in the masses of life
which people earth. Women are supposed to be very calm generally, but women feel just
as men feel. They need exercise for their faculties, and a field for their efforts,
as much as their brothers do. They suffer from too rigid a restraint, too absolute a
stagnation, precisely as men would suffer, and it is narrow-minded in their more privileged
fellow-creatures to say that they ought to confine themselves to making puddings and
knitting stockings, to playing on the piano and embroidering bags. It is thoughtless to
condemn them, or laugh at them, if they seek to do more, or learn more, than custom has
renounced necessary for their sex.
When thus alone, I not unfrequently heard Grace Poole's laugh, the same peal, the same
low, slow, ha-ha, which when first heard had thrilled me, I heard too her eccentric murmurs
stranger than her laugh. There were days when she was quite silent, but there were others
when I could not account for the sounds she made. Sometimes I saw her. She would come
out of her room with a basin, or a plate, or a tray in her hand, go down to the kitchen,
and shortly return, generally—oh, romantic reader, forgive me for telling the plain truth—bearing
a pot of porter.
Her appearance always acted as a damper to the curiosity raised by her oral oddities.
Hard-featured and staid, she had no point to which interest could attach. I made some
attempts to draw her into conversation, but she seemed a person of few words. A monosyllabic
reply usually cut short every effort of that sort.
The other members of the household—Viz John and his wife, Lair the housemaid, and Sophie
the French nurse—were decent people, but in no respect remarkable. With Sophie I used
to talk French, and sometimes I asked her questions about her native country, but she
was not of a descriptive or narrative turn, and generally gave such rapid and confused
answers as were calculated rather to check than encourage inquiry.
October, November, December passed away.
One afternoon in January Mrs. Fairfax had begged a holiday for Adèle because she had
a cold, and as Adèle seconded the request with an ardour that reminded me how precious
occasional holidays had been to me in my own childhood, I courted it, deeming that I did
well in showing pliability on the point.
It was a fine and calm day, though very cold. I was tired of sitting still in the library
through a whole long morning. Mrs. Fairfax had just written a letter which was waiting
to be posted, so I put on my bonnet and cloak, and volunteered to carry it to Hay. The distance,
two miles, would be a pleasant winter afternoon walk.
Having seen Adèle comfortably seated in her little chair by Mrs. Fairfax's parlour fireside,
and given her her best wax doll, which I usually kept enveloped in silver paper in a drawer,
to play with, and a storybook for change or amusement, and having replied to her,
Revene bientot, ma bonne amie, ma chère mademoiselle Jeanette,
with a kiss I set out.
The ground was hard, the air was still, my road was lonely. I walked fast till I got
warm, and then I walked slowly, to enjoy and analyse the species of pleasure brooding for
me in the hour and situation. It was three o'clock, the church bell tolled as I passed
under the belfry. The charm of the hour lay in its approaching dimness, in the low gliding
and pale beaming sun.
I was a mile from Thornfield, in a lane noted for wild roses in summer, for nuts and blackberries
in autumn, and even now possessing a few coral treasures in hips and whores, but whose best
winter delight lay in its utter solitude and leafless repose. If a breath of air stirred,
it made no sound here, for there was not a holly, not an evergreen to rustle, and the
stripped hawthorn and hazel bushes were as still as the white-worn stones which causewayed
the middle of the path. Far and wide, on each side, there were only fields where no cattle
now browsed, and the little brown birds which stirred occasionally in the hedge looked like
single russet leaves that had forgotten to drop.
This lane inclined uphill all the way to Hay. Having reached the middle, I sat down on the
stile which led thence into a field. Gathering my mantle around me, and sheltering my hands
in my muff, I did not feel the cold, though it froze keenly, as was attested by a sheet
of ice covering the causeway, where a little brooklet, now congealed, had overflowed after
a rapid thaw some days since.
From my seat I could look down on Thornfield. The grey and battle-minted hall was the principal
object in the vale below me. Its woods and dark rookery rose against the west. I lingered
till the sun went down amongst the trees, and sank crimson and clear behind them. I
then turned eastward.
On the hilltop above me sat the rising moon, pale yet as a cloud, but brightening momentarily.
She looked over Hay, which, half lost in trees, sent up a blue smoke from its few chimneys.
It was yet a mile distant, but in the absolute hush I could hear plainly its thin murmurs
of life. My ear, too, felt the flow of currents. In what dales and depths I could not tell,
but there were many hills beyond Hay, and doubtless many becks threading their passes.
That evening calm betrayed alike the tinkle of the nearest streams, the soft of the most
remote.
A rude noise broke on these fine ripplings and whisperings, at once so far away and so
clear. A positive tramp-tramp, a metallic clatter which effaced the soft wave-wanderings
as, in a picture, the solid mass of a crag, or the rough bowls of a great oak, drawn in
dark and strong on the foreground, effaced the aerial distance of Asia Hill, sunny horizon,
and blended clouds, where tint melts into tint.
The din was on the causeway, a horse was coming, the windings of the lane yet hid it, but it
approached. I was just leaving the stile, yet, as the path was narrow, I sat still to
let it go by. In those days I was young, and all sorts of fancies bright and dark tenanted
my mind. The memories of nursery stories were there amongst other rubbish, and when they
occurred, maturing youth added to them a vigour and vividness beyond what childhood could
give. As this horse approached, and as I watched for it to appear through the dusk, I remembered
certain of Bessie's tales, wherein figured a North of England spirit called a guy-trash,
which in the form of horse, mule, or large dog, haunted solitary ways, and sometimes
came upon belated travellers, as this horse was now coming upon me.
It was very near, but not yet in sight, when in addition to the tramp, tramp, I heard a
rush under the hedge, and close down by the hazel stems glided a great dog, whose black
and white colour made him a distinct object against the trees. It was exactly one form
of Bessie's guy-trash, a lion-like creature with long hair and a huge head. It passed
me, however, quietly enough, not staying to look up, with strange pretercanine eyes in
my face, as I half expected it would. The horse followed, a tall steed, and on its back
a rider. The man, the human being, broke the spell at once. Nothing ever rode the guy-trash.
It was always alone, and goblins, to my notions, though they might tenet the dumb carcasses
of beasts, could scarce covet shelter in the commonplace human form. No guy-trash was this,
only a traveller, taking the short cut to Millcot.
He passed, and I went on, a few steps, and I turned. A sliding sound, and an exclamation
of, What the juice is to do now? And a clattering tumble arrested my attention. Man and horse
were down. They had slipped on a sheet of ice which glazed the causeway. The dog came
bounding back, and seeing his master in a predicament, and hearing the horse groan,
barked until the evening hills echoed the sound, which was deep in proportion to his
magnitude. He snuffed round the prostrate group, and then he ran up to me. It was all
he could do. There was no other help at hand to summon. I obeyed him, and walked down to
the traveller, by this time struggling himself free of his steed. His efforts were so vigorous,
I thought he could not be much hurt, but I asked him the question, Are you injured, sir?
I think he was swearing, but am not certain. However, he was pronouncing some formula,
which prevented him from replying to me directly.
Can I do anything? I asked again.
You must just stand on one side, he answered as he rose, first to his knees, and then to
his feet.
I did. Whereupon began a heaving, stamping, clattering process, accompanied by a barking
and baying, which removed me effectually some yards distance. But I would not be driven
quite away till I saw the event.
This was finally fortunate. The horse was re-established, and the dog was silenced with
a down-pilot.
The traveller now, stooping, felt his foot and leg as if trying whether they were sound.
Apparently something ailed them, for he halted to the style whence I had just risen and sat
down.
I was in the mood for being useful, or at least officious, I think, for I now drew near
him again.
If you are hurt and want help, sir, I can fetch some one, either from Thornfield Hall
or from Hay.
Thank you, I shall do. I have no broken bones, only a sprain.
And again he stood up and tried his foot, but the result extorted an involuntary, ugh!
Something of daylight still lingered, and the moon was waxing bright, I could see him
plainly. His figure was enveloped in a riding-cloak, fur-collared, and steel clasped. Its details
were not apparent, but I traced the general points of middle height and considerable breadth
of chest. He had a dark face, with stern features, and a heavy brow. His eyes and gathered eyebrows
looked eyeful and thwarted just now. He was past youth, but had not reached middle age.
Perhaps he might be thirty-five.
I felt no fear of him, and but little shyness. Had he been a handsome, heroic-looking gentleman,
I should not have dared to stand thus questioning him against his will, and offering my services
unasked. I had hardly ever seen a handsome youth, never in my life spoken to one. I had
a theoretical reverence and homage for beauty, elegance, gallantry, fascination. But had
I met those qualities incarnate in masculine shape, I should have known instinctively that
they neither had nor could have sympathy with anything in me, and should have shunned them
as one would fire, lightning, or anything else that is bright but antipathetic.
If even this stranger had smiled, and been good-humoured to me when I addressed him,
if he had put off my offer of assistance gaily and with thanks, I should have gone on my
way, and not felt any vocation to renew inquiries. But the frown, the roughness of the traveller
set me at my ease. I retained my station when he waved to me to go, and announced,
I cannot think of leaving you, sir, at so late an hour in this solitary lane, till I
see you are fit to mount your horse.'
He looked at me when I said this. He had hardly turned his eyes in my direction before.
"'I should think you ought to be at home yourself,' said he, if you have a home in this neighbourhood.
Where do you come from?'
"'From just below, and I am not at all afraid of being out late when it is moonlight. I
will run over to Hay for you with pleasure, if you wish it. Indeed, I am going there to
post a letter.'
"'You live just below? Do you mean at that house with the battlements?' Pointing to Thornfield
Hall, on which the moon cast a hoary gleam, bringing it out distinct and pale from the
woods, that by contrast with the western sky, now seemed one mass of shadow.
"'Yes, sir.'
"'Whose house is it?'
"'Mr. Rochester's.'
"'Do you know Mr. Rochester?'
"'No, I have never seen him.'
"'He is not resident, then?'
"'No.'
"'Can you tell me where he is?'
"'I cannot.'
"'You are not a servant at the Hall, of course. You are—'
He stopped, ran his eye over my dress, which as usual was quite simple—a black merino
cloak, a black beaver bonnet, neither of them half fine enough for a lady's maid. He seemed
puzzled to decide what I was. I helped him.
"'I am the governess.'
"'Ah, the governess,' he repeated,
"'due's taken me if I had not forgotten. The governess.'
And again my raiment underwent scrutiny.
In two minutes he rose from the stile. His face expressed pain when he tried to move.
"'I cannot commission you to fetch help,' he said,
"'but you may help me a little, if you will be so kind.'
"'Yes, sir.'
"'You have not an umbrella that I can use as a stick?'
"'No.'
"'Try to get hold of my horse's bridle, and lead him to me. You are not afraid?'
"'I should have been afraid to touch a horse when alone, but when told to do it I was disposed
to obey. I put down my muff on the stile, and went up to the tall steed. I endeavoured
to catch the bridle, but it was a spirited thing, and would not let me come near its
head. I made effort on effort, though in vain. Meantime I was mortally afraid of its trampling
forefeet.'
The traveller waited and watched for some time, and at last he laughed.
"'I see,' he said,
"'the mountain will never be brought to Mohammed. So all you can do is to aid Mohammed to go
to the mountain. I must beg of you to come here.'
"'I came. Excuse me,' he continued,
"'necessity compels me to make you useful.'
"'He laid a heavy hand on my shoulder, and leaning on me with some stress, limped to
his horse. Having once caught the bridle, he mastered it directly, and sprang to his
saddle, grimacing grimly as he made the effort, for it wrenched his sprain.'
"'Now,' said he, releasing his underlip from a hard bite,
"'just hand me my whip. It lies there under the hedge.'
I sought it and found it.
"'Thank you. Now make haste with a letter to Hay, and return as fast as you can.'
A touch of a spurred heel made his horse first start and rear, and then bound away. The dog
rushed in his traces. All three vanished, like heath that in the wilderness the wild wind
whirls away.
I took up my muff and walked on. The incident had occurred and was gone for me. It was an
incident of no moment, no romance, no interest in a sense. Yet it marked with change one
single hour of a monotonous life. My help had been needed and claimed. I had given it.
I was pleased to have done something. Trivial, transitory though the deed was, it was yet
an active thing, and I was weary of an existence all passive.
The new face, too, was like a new picture introduced to the gallery of memory, and it
was dissimilar to all the others hanging there, firstly because it was masculine, and secondly
because it was dark, strong, and stern.
I had it still before me when I entered Hay, and slipped the letter into the post office.
I saw it as I walked fast downhill all the way home. When I came to the stile, I stopped
a minute, looked round and listened, with an idea that a horse's hooves might ring on
the causeway again, and that a rider in a cloak, and a guy-trash-like Newfoundland dog
might again be apparent. I saw only the hedge, and a pollard willow before me, rising up
still and straight to meet the moonbeams. I heard only the faintest waft of wind roaming
fitful among the trees round Thornfield, a mile distant. And when I glanced down in the
direction of the murmur, my eye, traversing the hall front, caught a light kindling in
the window. It reminded me that I was late, and I hurried on. I did not like re-entering
Thornfield.
To pass its threshold was to return to stagnation, to cross the silent hall, to ascend the darksome
staircase, to seek my own lonely little room, and then to meet, tranquil, Mrs. Fairfax,
and spend the long winter evening with her, and her only, was to quell wholly the faint
excitement wakened by my walk, to slip again over my faculties the viewless fetters of
a uniform and too still existence, of an existence whose very privileges of security and ease
I was becoming incapable of appreciating. What good it would have done me, at that time,
to have been tossed in the storms of an uncertain, struggling life, and to have been taught by
the rough and bitter experience to long for the calm amidst which I now repined. Yes,
just as much good as it would do a man tired of sitting still in a too easy chair to take
a long walk, and just as natural was the wish to stir, under my circumstances, as it would
be under his.
I lingered at the gates, I lingered on the lawn, I paced backwards and forwards on the
pavement. The shutters of the glass door were closed, I could not see into the interior,
and both my eyes and spirit seemed drawn from the gloomy house, from the grey hollow filled
with rayless cells, as it appeared to me, to that sky expanded before me, a blue sea
absolved from taint of cloud, the moon ascending it in solemn march, her orb seeming to look
up as she left the hill-tops, from behind which she had come, far and farther below
her, and aspired to the zenith, midnight dark in its fathomless depth and measureless distance,
and for those trembling stars that followed her course, they made my heart tremble, my
veins glow when I viewed them.
Little things recall us to earth, the clock struck in the hall, that sufficed, I turned
from moon and stars, opened a side door, and went in. The hall was not dark, nor yet
was it lit, only by the high hung bronze lamp, a warm glow suffused both it and the lower
steps of the oak staircase. This ruddy shine issued from the great dining-room, whose two-leafed
door stood open and showed a genial fire in the grate, glancing on marble hearth and brass
fire-irons, and revealing purple draperies and polished furniture in the most pleasant
radiance. It revealed, too, a group near the mantelpiece. I had scarcely caught it, and
scarcely become aware of a cheerful mingling of voices, amongst which I seemed to distinguish
the tones of a dell when the door closed.
I hastened to Mrs Fairfax's room. There was a fire there, too, but no candle and no Mrs
Fairfax. Instead, all alone, sitting upright on the rug, and gazing with gravity at the
blaze, I beheld a great black-and-white long-haired dog, just like the guy-trash of the lane.
It was so like it that I went forward and said, Pilot, and the thing got up and came
to me and stuffed me. I caressed him, and he wagged his great tail, but he looked an
eerie creature to be alone with, and I could not tell whence he had come. I rang the bell,
for I wanted a candle, and I wanted, too, to get an account of this visitant.
Leia entered.
What dog is this?
He came with Master.
With whom?
With Master, Mr Rochester. He has just arrived.
Indeed! And is Mrs Fairfax with him?
Yes, and Miss Adele. They are in a dining-room, and John has gone for a surgeon, for Master
has had an accident. His horse fell, and his ankle is sprained.
Did the horse fall in Hay Lane?
Yes. Coming down hill, it slipped on some ice.
Ah!
Bring me a candle, will you, Leia?
Leia bought it. She entered, followed by Mrs Fairfax, who repeated the news, adding that
for Mr Carter the surgeon was come, and was now with Mr Rochester. Then she hurried out
to give orders about tea, and I went upstairs to take off my things.
Mr. Rochester, it seems, by the surgeon's orders, went to bed early that night.
Nor did he rise soon next morning.
When he did come down, it was to attend to business.
His agent and some of his tenants were arrived and waiting to speak with him.
Adele and I had now to vacate the library.
It would be in daily requisition as a reception room for callers.
A fire was lit in an apartment upstairs, and there I carried our books and arranged it for the future schoolroom.
I discerned in the course of the morning that Thornfield Hall was a changed place.
No longer silent as a church, it echoed every hour or two to a knock at the door or a clang of the bell.
Steps, too, often traversed the hall, and new voices spoke in different keys below.
A rift from the outer world was flowing through it.
It had a master. For my part, I liked it better.
Adele was not easy to teach that day.
She could not apply.
She kept running to the door and looking over the banister to see if she could get a glimpse of Mr. Rochester.
Then she coined pretexts to go downstairs in order, as I shrewdly suspected, to visit the library where I knew she was not wanted.
Then, when I got a little angry and made her sit still, she continued to talk incessantly of her,
a me, Mr. Edward Fairfax de Rochester, as she dubbed him.
I had not before heard his praynomen.
And to conjecture what presence he had brought her, for it appears that he had intimated the night before,
that when his luggage came from Milket, there would be found amongst it a little box in whose contents she had an interest.
Et celle-d'or signifiait, she said, qu'il y aura là-dedans un cadeau pour moi, et peut-être pour vous aussi, mademoiselle.
Monsieur a parlé de vous. Il m'a demandé le nom de ma gouvernante.
Et si elle n'était pas une petite personne, assez mince et un peu pâle?
J'ai dit que oui, car c'est vrai, n'est-ce pas, mademoiselle?
I and my pupil dined as usual in Mrs. Fairfax's parlour.
The afternoon was wild and snowy, and we passed it in the schoolroom.
At dark I allowed Adele to put away books and work, and to run downstairs.
For from the comparative silence below, and from the cessation of appeals to the doorbell,
I conjectured that Mr. Rochester was now at liberty.
Left alone I walked to the window, but nothing was to be seen thence.
Twilight and snowflakes together thickened the air, and hid the very shrubs on the lawn.
I let down the curtain, and went back to the fireside.
In the clear embers I was tracing a view, not unlike a picture I remembered to have seen of
the Castle of Heidelberg on the Rhine, when Mrs. Fairfax came in, breaking up by her entrance the
fiery mosaic I had been piecing together, and scattering, too, some heavy unwelcome thoughts
that were beginning to throng on my solitude. Mr. Rochester would be glad if you and your
couple would take tea with him in the drawing-room this evening, she said.
He has been so much engaged all day that he could not ask to see you before.
When is his tea-time? I inquired. Oh, at six o'clock. He keeps early hours in the country.
You had better change your frock now. I will go with you and fasten it. Here is a candle.
Is it necessary to change my frock? Yes, you had better.
I always dress for the evening when Mr. Rochester is here.
This additional ceremony seemed somewhat stately. However, I repaired to my room,
and with Mrs. Fairfax's aid replaced my black stuffed dress by one of black silk. The best,
and the only additional one I had, except for one of light grey, which, in my low-wood notion of
the toilette, I thought too fine to be worn, except on first-rate occasions.
You want a brooch, said Mrs. Fairfax.
I had a single little pearl ornament which Miss Temple gave me as a parting keepsake.
I put it on, and then we went downstairs. Unused as I was to strangers, it was rather a trial to
appear thus formally summoned in Mr. Rochester's presence. I let Mrs. Fairfax proceed me into the
dining-room, and kept in her shade as we crossed that apartment. And passing the arch, whose curtain
was now dropped, entered the elegant recess beyond. Two wax candles stood lighted on the table,
and two on the mantelpiece. Basking in the light and heat of a superb fire lay Pilate,
Adele knelt near him. Half reclined on a couch appeared Mr. Rochester, his foot supported by
the cushion. He was looking at Adele and the dog, the fire shone full on his face.
I knew my traveller, with his broad and jetty eyebrows, his square forehead made square by
the horizontal sweep of his black hair. I recognized his decisive nose, more remarkable
for character than beauty, his full nostrils denoting, I thought, collar. His grim mouth,
chin, and jaw. Yes, all three were very grim, and no mistake. His shape, now divested of cloak,
I perceived harmonized in squareness with his physiognomy. I suppose it was a good figure in
the athletic sense of the term, broad-chested and thin-flanked, though neither tall nor graceful.
Mr. Rochester must have been aware of the entrance of Mrs. Fairfax and myself,
but it appeared he was not in the mood to notice us, for he never lifted his head as we approached.
"'Here is Miss Eyre, sir,' said Mrs. Fairfax in her quiet way. He bowed,
still not taking his eyes from the group of the dog and child.
"'Let Miss Eyre be seated,' he said, and there was something in the forced, stiff bow,
in the impatient, yet formal tone, which seemed further to express,
what the deuce is it to me whether Miss Eyre be there or not. At this moment I am not disposed
to accost her.' I sat down quite disembarrassed. A reception of finished politeness would probably
have confused me. I could not have returned or repaid it by answering grace and elegance on my
part. But harsh caprice laid me under no obligation. On the contrary, a decent quiescence under the
freak of manner gave me the advantage. Besides, the eccentricity of the proceeding was piquant.
I felt interested to see how he would go on.
He went on as a statue would. That is, he neither spoke nor moved. Mrs. Fairfax seemed to think
it necessary that someone should be amiable, and she began to talk. Kindly as usual, and as usual,
rather trite. She condoled with him on the pressure of business he had had all day,
on the annoyance it must have been to him with that painful sprain.
Then she commended his patience and perseverance in going through with it.
"'Madam, I should like some tea,' was the sole rejoinder she got. She hastened to ring the bell,
and when the tray came she proceeded to arrange the cups, spoons, etc., with assiduous celerity.
I and Adèle went to the table, but the master did not leave his couch.
"'Will you hand Mr. Rochester's cup?' said Mrs. Fairfax to me.
Adèle might perhaps spill it. I did as requested. As he took the cup from my hand, Adèle,
thinking the moment propitious for making a request in my favor, cried out,
"'Is it not, sir, that there is a gift for Miss Airdrie in your little head?'
"'Who talks of a gift?' he said gruffly.
"'Did you expect a present, Miss Airdrie? Are you fond of presents?'
And he searched my face with eyes that I saw were dark, irate, and piercing.
"'I hardly know, sir. I have little experience of them. They are generally thought pleasant
things. Generally thought? But what do you think?'
"'I should be obliged to take time, sir, before I could give you an answer worthy
of your acceptance. A present has many faces to it, has it not?
And one should consider all before pronouncing an opinion as to its nature.'
"'Miss Aire, you are not so unsophisticated as Adèle.
She demands a cadeau clamorously the moment she sees me. You beat about the bush.'
"'Because I have less confidence in my desserts than Adèle has.
She can prefer the claim of old acquaintance and the right, too, of custom.
For she says you have always been in the habit of giving her playthings.
But if I had to make out a case, I should be puzzled, since I am a stranger
and have done nothing to entitle me to an acknowledgment.'
"'Oh, don't fall back on over modesty. I have examined Adèle,
and find you have taken great pains with her. She is not bright.
She has no talents. Yet in a short time she has made much improvement.'
"'Sir, you have now given me my cadeau. I am obliged to you.
It is the mead teacher's most covet, praise of their pupil's progress.'
Said Mr. Rochester, and he took his tea in silence.
"'Come to the fire,' said the master when the tray was taken away,
and Mrs. Fairfax had settled into a corner with her knitting.
While Adèle was leading me by the hand round the room,
showing me the beautiful books and ornaments on the consoles and chiffonnières.
We obeyed, as in duty bound. Adèle wanted to take a seat on my knee,
but she was ordered to amuse herself with Pilate.
"'You have been resident in my house three months?'
"'Yes, sir.'
"'And you came from?'
"'From Lowood School in Blankshire.'
"'Ah, a charitable concern.'
"'How long were you there?'
"'Eight years.'
"'Eight years! You must be tenacious of life.
I thought half the time in such a place would have done up any constitution.
No wonder you have rather the look of another world.
I marveled where you had got that sort of face.
When you came on me in Hay Lane last night, I thought unaccountably of fairy tales,
and had half a mind to demand whether you had bewitched my horse.
I am not sure yet.'
"'Who are your parents?'
"'I have none. Nor ever had, I suppose. Do you remember them?'
"'No.'
"'I thought not. And so you were waiting for your people when you sat on that stile.'
"'For whom, sir?'
"'For the men in green. It was a proper moonlight evening for them.
Did I break through one of your rings that you spread that damned ice on the causeway?'
I shook my head.
"'The men in green all forsook England a hundred years ago,' I said,
speaking as seriously as he had done.
"'And not even in Hay Lane or the fields about it could you find a trace of them.
I don't think either summer or harvest or winter moon will ever shine on their revels more.'
Mrs. Fairfax had dropped her knitting, and with raised eyebrows
seemed wondering at what sort of talk this was.
"'Well,' resumed Mr. Rochester,
"'if you disown parents, you must have some sort of kinsfolk. Uncles and aunts?'
"'No. None that I ever saw.'
"'And your home?'
"'I have none.'
"'Where do your brothers and sisters live?'
"'I have no brothers or sisters.'
"'Who recommended you to come here?'
I advertised, and Mrs. Fairfax answered my advertisement.
"'Yes,' said the good lady, who now knew what ground we were upon,
and I am daily thankful for the choice Providence led me to make.
Miss Eyre has been an invaluable companion to me, and a kind and careful teacher to Adele.'
"'Don't trouble yourself to give her character,' returned Mr. Rochester.
Eulogiums will not bias me. I shall judge for myself.' She began by felling my horse.
"'Sir,' said Mrs. Fairfax,
"'I have to thank her for this sprain.' The widow looked bewildered.
"'Miss Eyre, have you ever lived in a town?'
"'No, sir.'
"'Have you seen much society? None but the pupils and teachers of Lowood,
and now the inmates of Thornfield. Have you read much?
Only such books as came in my way, and they have not been numerous or very learned.'
"'You have lived the life of a nun?'
"'No doubt you are well drilled in religious forms.
Brocklehurst, who I understand directs Lowood, is a parson, is he not?'
"'Yes, sir.'
"'And you girls probably worshiped him,
as a convent full of religiores would worship their director.'
"'Oh, no.'
"'You are very cool.'
"'No. What, a novice not worship her priest. That sounds blasphemous.'
"'I disliked Mr. Brocklehurst, and I was not alone in the feeling. He is a harsh man,
at once pompous and meddling. He cut off our hair and, for economy's sake,
bought us bad needles and thread with which we could hardly sew.'
"'That was very false economy,' remarked Mrs. Fairfax, who now again caught the drift of the dialogue.
"'And was that the head in front of his offending?' demanded Mr. Rochester.
"'He starved us when he had the sole superintendence of the provision department,
before the committee was appointed. And he bored us with long lectures once a week,
and with evening readings from books of his own indicting, about sudden deaths and judgments,
which made us afraid to go to bed.'
"'What age were you when you went to Lowood?'
"'About ten.'
"'And you stayed there eight years. You are now then eighteen?'
"'I assented. Arithmetic, you see, is useful. Without its aid, I should hardly have been
able to guess your age. It is a point difficult to fix, where the features and countenance are
so much at variances in your case. And now, what did you learn at Lowood? Can you play?'
"'A little.'
"'Of course. That is the established answer. Go into the library. I mean, if you please.
Excuse my tone of command. I am used to say, do this, and it is done.
I cannot alter my customary habits for one new inmate. Go, then, into the library.
Take a candle with you. Leave the door open, sit down to the piano, and play a tune.'
I departed, obeying his directions.
"'Enough,' he called out in a few minutes.
"'You play a little, I see, like any other English schoolgirl.
Perhaps rather better than some, but not well.'
I closed the piano and returned. Mr. Rochester continued.
"'Adèle showed me some sketches this morning, which she said were yours. I don't know whether
they were entirely of your doing. Probably a master aided you?'
"'No, indeed,' I interjected.
"'Ah, that pricks pride. Well, fetch me your portfolio.'
If you can vouch for its contents being original.
But don't pass your word unless you are certain I can recognize patchwork.
Then I will say nothing, and you shall judge for yourself, sir.'
I brought the portfolio from the library.
"'Approach the table,' he said, and I wheeled it to his couch.
Adèle and Mrs. Fairfax drew near to see the pictures.
"'No crowding,' said Mr. Rochester.
"'Take the drawings from my hand as I finish with them, but don't push your faces up to mine.'
He deliberately scrutinized each sketch and painting.
Three he laid aside. The others, when he had examined them, he swept from him.
"'Take them off to the other table, Mrs. Fairfax,' said he.
"'And look at them with Adèle. You,' glancing at me.
"'Resume your seat and answer my questions. I perceive those pictures were done by one hand.
Was that hand yours?'
"'Yes.'
"'And when did you find time to do them? They have taken much time and some thought.'
"'I did them in the last two vacations I spent at Lowood, when I had no other occupation.'
"'Where did you get your copies?'
"'Out of my head.'
"'That head I see now on your shoulders?'
"'Yes, sir.'
"'Has it other furniture of the same kind within?'
"'I should think it may have. I should hope better.'
He spread the pictures before him and again surveyed them alternately.
"'While he is so occupied, I will tell you, reader, what they are.
And first, I must premise that they are nothing wonderful.
The subjects had, indeed, risen vividly on my mind.
As I saw them with the spiritual eye, before I attempted to embody them, they were striking.
But my hand would not second my fancy, and in each case it had wrought out but a pale
portrait of the thing I had conceived. These pictures were in watercolors.
The first represented clouds, low and vivid, rolling over a swollen sea.
All the distance was an eclipse. So too was the foreground, or rather,
the nearest billows, for there was no land. One gleam of light lifted into relief a half-submerged
mast, on which sat a cormorant, dark and large, with wings flecked with foam.
Its beak held a gold bracelet set with gems, that I had touched with as brilliant tints as
my palate could yield, and as glittering distinctness as my pencil could impart.
Sinking below the burdened mast, a drowned corpse glanced through the green water.
A fair arm was the only limb clearly visible, whence the bracelet had been washed or torn.
The second picture contained for foreground only the dim peak of a hill, with grass and some leaves
slanting as if by a breeze. Beyond and above spread an expanse of sky, dark blue as at twilight,
rising into the sky was a woman's shape to the bust, portrayed in tints as dusk and soft as I
could combine. The dim forehead was crowned with a star. The liniments below were seen as through
a suffusion of vapor. The eyes shone dark and wild. The hair streamed shadowy, like a beamless
cloud torn by storm or by electric travail. On the neck lay a pale reflection like moonlight.
The same faint luster touched the train of thin clouds from which rose and bowed this vision of
the evening star. The third showed the pinnacle of an iceberg piercing a polar winter sky.
A muster of northern lights reared their dim lances close serried along the horizon.
Throwing these into distance rose in the foreground a head, a colossal head inclined
toward the iceberg and resting against it. Two thin hands joined under the forehead and supporting
it drew up before the lower features a sable veil, a brow quite bloodless, white as bone,
and an eye hollow and fixed, blank of meaning but for the glassiness of despair, alone were
visible. Above the temples, amidst wreathe turban folds of black drapery, vague in its
character and consistency as cloud, gleamed a ring of white flame, gemmed with sparkles of a more
lurid tinge. This pale crescent was the likeness of a kingly crown. What it diademed was the shape
which shape had none. Were you happy when you painted these pictures? asked Mr. Rochester
presently. I was absorbed, sir, yes, and I was happy. To paint them in short was to enjoy one
of the keenest pleasures I have ever known. That is not saying much. Your pleasures by your own
account have been few. But I dare say you did exist in a kind of artist's dreamland while you
arranged these strange tints. Did you sit at them long each day? I had nothing else to do
because it was the vacation, and I sat at them from morning till noon and from noon till night.
The length of the midsummer days favored my inclination to apply.
And you felt self-satisfied with the result of your ardent labors. Far from it. I was tormented
by the contrast between my idea and my handiwork. In each case, I had imagined something which I was
quite powerless to realize. Not quite. You have secured the shadow of your thought,
but no more, probably. You had not enough of the artist's skill and science to give it full being.
Yet the drawings are, for a schoolgirl, peculiar. As to the thoughts, they are elfish.
These eyes in the evening star you must have seen in a dream.
How could you make them look so clear, and yet not at all brilliant? For the planet above
quells their rays. And what meaning is that in their solemn depth? And who taught you to paint
wind? There is a high gale in that sky and on this hilltop. Where did you see Latmos? For that is
Latmos. There, put the drawings away.
I had scarce tied the strings of the portfolio when looking at his watch he said abruptly,
It is nine o'clock. What are you about, Miss Eyre, to let Adèle sit up so long?
Take her to bed. Adèle went to kiss him before quitting the room. He endured the caress,
but scarcely seemed to relish it more than Pilate would have done, nor so much.
I wish you all good night now, said he, making a movement of the hand toward the door,
in token that he was tired of our company, and wished to dismiss us. Mrs. Fairfax folded up her
knitting. I took my portfolio, we curtsied to him, received a frigid bow in return, and so withdrew.
You said Mr. Rochester was not strikingly peculiar, Mrs. Fairfax. I observed when I rejoined her in her
room after putting Adèle to bed. Well, is he? I think so. He is very changeful and abrupt.
True, no doubt he may appear so to a stranger, but I am so accustomed to his manner I never think of
it, and then, if he has peculiarities of temper, allowance should be made. Why? Partly because it
is his nature, and we can none of us help our nature, and partly because he has painful thoughts,
no doubt, to harass him and make his spirits unequal. What about? Family troubles, for one thing,
but he has no family. Not now, but he has had, or at least relatives. He lost his elder brother
a few years since. His elder brother? Yes, the present Mr. Rochester has not been very long in
possession of the property, only about nine years. Nine years is a tolerable time. Was he so very fond
of his brother as to still be inconsolable for his loss? Why, no, perhaps not. I believe there were
some misunderstandings between them. Mr. Roland Rochester was not quite just to Mr. Edward,
and perhaps he prejudiced his father against him. The old gentleman was fond of money, and anxious
to keep the family estate together. He did not like to diminish the property by division,
and yet he was anxious that Mr. Edward should have wealth, too, to keep up the consequence of the
name, and soon after he was of age some steps were taken that were not quite fair, and made a great
seal of mischief. Old Mr. Rochester and Mr. Roland combined to bring Mr. Edward into what he
considered a painful position, for the sake of making his fortune. What the precise nature of
that position was, I never clearly knew, but his spirit could not brook what he had to suffer in it.
He is not very forgiving. He broke with his family, and now for many years he has led an
unsettled kind of life. I don't think he has ever been resident at Thornfield for a fortnight
together, since the death of his brother without a will left him master of the estate, and indeed,
no wonder he shuns the old place. Why should he shun it? Perhaps he thinks it gloomy.
The answer was evasive. I should have liked something clearer, but Mrs. Fairfax either
could not, or would not, give me more explicit information of the origin and nature of Mr.
Rochester's trials. She averred they were a mystery to herself, and that what she knew was
chiefly from conjecture. It was evident indeed that she wished me to drop the subject, which I
XIV.
For several subsequent days I saw little of Mr. Rochester.
In the mornings he seemed much engaged with business,
and in the afternoon gentleman from Milket or the neighborhood called,
and sometimes stayed to dine with him.
When his sprain was well enough to admit of horse exercise,
he rode out a good deal, probably to return these visits,
as he generally did not come back till late at night.
During this interval even a dell was seldom sent forth to his presence,
and all my acquaintance with him was confined to an occasional recontra in the hall,
or on the stairs, or in the gallery,
when he would sometimes pass me haughtily and coldly,
just acknowledging my presence by a distant nod or a cool glance,
and sometimes bow and smile with gentleman-like affability.
His changes of mood did not offend me,
because I saw that I had nothing to do with their alteration.
The ebb and flow depended on causes quite disconnected with me.
One day he had had company to dinner, and had sent for my portfolio,
in order doubtless to exhibit its contents.
The gentleman went away early to attend a public meeting in Milket,
as Mrs. Fairfax informed me.
But the night being wet and inclement, Mr. Rochester did not accompany them.
Soon after they were gone he rang the bell.
A message came that I and a dell were to go downstairs.
I brushed a dell's hair and made her neat,
and having ascertained that I was myself in my usual Quaker trim,
where there was nothing to retouch,
all being too close and plain, braided locks included,
to admit of disarrangement.
We descended, a dell,
wondering whether the petite coffer was at length come,
for owing to some mistake, its arrival had hitherto been delayed.
She was gratified.
There it stood, a little carton on the table when we entered the dining-room.
She appeared to know it by instinct.
Ma boite, ma boite!
She exclaimed, running towards it.
Yes, there is your boite at last.
Take it into a corner, you genuine daughter of Paris,
and amuse yourself with disemboweling it,
said the deep and rather sarcastic voice of Mr. Rochester,
proceeding from the depths of an immense easy chair at the fireside.
And mind, he continued,
don't bother me with any details of the anatomical process,
or any notice of the condition of the entrails.
Let your operation be conducted in silence.
Tiens-toi tranquille, enfant.
Comprends-tu?
A dell seemed scarcely to need the warning.
She had already retired to a sofa with her treasure,
and was busy untying the cord which secured the lid.
Having removed this impediment,
and lifted certain silvery envelopes of tissue-paper,
she merely exclaimed,
Au ciel, que c'est beau!
and then remained absorbed in ecstatic contemplation.
Is monsieur there?
Now demanded the master,
half rising from his seat, to look round to the door,
near which I still stood.
Ah, well, come forward, be seated here.
He drew a chair near his own.
I am not fond of the prattle of children, he continued.
For old bachelor as I am,
I have no pleasant dissociations connected with their lisp.
It would be intolerable to me to pass a whole evening tete-a-tete with a brat.
Don't draw that chair farther off, Miss Ayres,
sit down exactly where I placed it.
If you please, that is.
Confound these civilities, I continually forget them.
Nor do I particularly affect simple-minded old ladies.
By the by, I must have mine in mind.
It won't do to neglect her, she is a Fairfax,
or wed to one,
and blood is said to be thicker than water.
He rang, and dispatched an invitation to Mrs. Fairfax,
who soon arrived, knitting-basket in hand.
Good evening, madam.
I sent to you for a charitable purpose.
I have forbidden Adèle to talk to me about her presence,
and she is bursting with repletion.
Have the goodness to serve as her auditress and interlocutress.
It will be one of the most benevolent acts you ever performed.
Adèle, indeed, no sooner saw Mrs. Fairfax
than she summoned her to her sofa,
and there quickly filled her lap with the porcelain, the ivory,
the wax and contents of her boite,
pouring out meantime explanations and raptures
in such broken English as she was mistress of.
Now I have performed the part of a good host,
pursued Mr. Rochester.
Put my guests into the way of amusing each other.
I ought to be at liberty to attend to my own pleasure.
Miss Eyre, draw your chair still a little farther forward.
You are yet too far back.
I cannot see you without disturbing my position in this comfortable chair,
which I have no mind to do.
I did as I was bid,
though I would much rather have remained somewhat in the shade.
But Mr. Rochester had such a direct way of giving orders,
it seemed a matter of course to obey him promptly.
We were, as I have said, in the dining-room.
The luster, which had been lit for dinner,
filled the room with a festal breath of light.
The large fire was all red and clear.
The purple curtains hung rich and ample
before the lofty window and loftier arch.
Everything was still, save the subdued chat of Adele.
She dared not speak loud.
And filling up each pause,
the beating of winter rain against the panes.
Mr. Rochester, as he sat in his damask-covered chair,
looked different to what I had seen him look before.
Not quite so stern, much less gloomy.
There was a smile on his lips and his eyes sparkled,
whether with wine or not, I am not sure.
But I think it very probable.
He was, in short, in his after-dinner mood,
more expanded in genial and also more self-indulgent
than the frigid and rigid temperature of the morning.
Still, he looked preciously grim,
cushioning his massive head against the swelling back of his chair
and receiving the light of the fire on his granite-hewn features,
and in his great dark eyes.
For he had great dark eyes, and very fine eyes, too,
not without a certain change in their depth sometimes,
which, if it was not softness, reminded you, at least, of that feeling.
He had been looking two minutes at the fire,
and I had been looking the same length of time at him.
When turning suddenly, he caught my gaze fastened on his physiognomy.
You examine me, Miss Eyre," he said.
Do you think me handsome?
I should, if I had deliberated, have replied to his question
by something conventionally vague and polite,
but the answer somehow slipped from my tongue before I was aware.
No, sir.
Ah, by my word, there is something singular about you," said he.
You have the air of a little nonet, quaint, quiet, grave and simple,
as you sit with your hands before you and your eyes generally bent on the carpet,
except, by the by, when they are directed piercingly to my face,
as just now, for instance.
And when one asks you a question,
or makes a remark to which you are obliged to reply,
you wrap out a round rejoinder, which, if not blunt, is at least brusque.
What do you mean by it?
Sir, I was too plain, I beg your pardon.
I ought to have replied that it was not easy to give an impromptu answer
to a question about appearances, that tastes mostly differ,
and that beauty is of little consequence or something of that sort.
You ought to have replied no such thing, beauty of little consequence, indeed.
And so, under pretense of softening the previous outrage,
of stroking and soothing me into placidity,
you stick a sly penknife under my ear.
Go on, what fault do you find with me, pray?
I suppose I have all my limbs and all my features like any other man.
Mr. Rochester, allow me to disown my first answer.
I intended no pointed repartee.
It was only a blunder.
Just so.
I think so.
And you shall be answerable for it.
Criticize me.
Does my forehead not please you?
He lifted up the sable waves of hair which lay horizontally over his brow,
and showed a solid enough mass of intellectual organs,
but an abrupt deficiency where the suave sign of benevolence should have risen.
Now, ma'am, am I a fool?
Far from it, sir.
You would perhaps think me rude if I inquired in return whether you are a philanthropist.
There again, another stick of the penknife when she pretended to pat my head.
And that is because I said I did not like the society of children and old women,
low be it spoken.
No, young lady, I am not a general philanthropist.
But I bear a conscience.
And he pointed to the prominences which are said to indicate that faculty,
and which, fortunately for him, were sufficiently conspicuous,
giving indeed a marked breadth to the upper part of his head.
And besides, I once had a kind of rude tenderness of heart.
When I was as old as you, I was a feeling enough fellow,
partial to the unfledged, unfostered and unlucky,
but fortune has knocked me about since.
She has even kneaded me with her knuckles,
and now I flatter myself that I am hard and tough as an India rubber ball.
Pervious, though, through a chink or two still,
and with one sentient point in the middle of the lump,
yes, does that leave hope for me?
Hope of what, sir?
Of my final re-transformation from India rubber back to flesh.
Decidedly he has had too much wine, I thought,
and I did not know what answer to make his queer question.
How could I tell whether he was capable of being re-transformed?
You look very much puzzled, Miss Eyre.
And though you are not pretty any more than I am handsome,
yet a puzzled Eyre becomes you.
Besides, it is convenient,
for it keeps those searching eyes of yours away from my physiognomy
and busies them with the worsted flowers of the rug.
So puzzle on.
Young lady, I am disposed to be gregarious and communicative tonight.
With this announcement he rose from his chair
and stood leaning his arm on the marble mantelpiece.
In that attitude his shape was seen plainly as well as his face.
His unusual breadth of chest,
disproportionate almost to his length of limb,
I am sure most people would have thought him an ugly man.
Yet there was so much unconscious pride in his port,
so much ease in his demeanor,
such a look of complete indifference to his own external appearance.
So haughty a reliance on the power of other qualities,
intrinsic or adventitious,
to atone for the lack of mere personal attractiveness,
that in looking at him one inevitably shared the indifference
and even in a blind imperfect sense put faith in the confidence.
I am disposed to be gregarious and communicative tonight, he repeated.
And that is why I sent for you.
The fire and the chandelier were not sufficient company for me,
nor would Pilate have been, for none of these can talk.
Adele is a degree better, but still far below the mark, Mrs. Fairfax ditto.
You, I am persuaded, can suit me if you will.
You puzzled me the first evening I invited you down here.
I have almost forgotten you since.
Other ideas have driven yours from my head.
But tonight I am resolved to be at ease,
to dismiss what importunes and recall what pleases.
It would please me now to draw you out, to learn more of you.
Therefore speak.
Instead of speaking I smiled,
and not a very complacent or submissive smile either.
Speak, he urged.
What about, sir?
Whatever you like.
I leave both the choice of subject and the manner of treating it entirely to yourself.
Accordingly I sat and said nothing.
If he expects me to talk for the mere sake of talking and showing off,
he will find he has addressed himself to the wrong person, I thought.
You are dumb, Miss Eyre.
I was dumb still.
He bent his head a little toward me,
and with a single hasty glance seemed to dive into my eyes.
Stubborn, he said.
And annoyed. Ah, it is consistent.
I put my request in an absurd, almost insolent form.
Miss Eyre, I beg your pardon.
The fact is, once for all, I don't wish to treat you like an inferior.
That is, correcting himself.
I claim only such superiority as must result from twenty years' difference in age
and a century's advance in experience.
This is legitimate.
Et je tiens, as Adèle would say.
And it is by virtue of this superiority and this alone
that I desire you to have the goodness to talk to me a little now and divert my thoughts,
which are galled with dwelling on one point,
cankering as a rusty nail.
He had deigned an explanation, almost an apology,
and I did not feel insensible to his condescension,
and would not seem so.
I am willing to amuse you if I can, sir, quite willing,
but I cannot introduce a topic, because how do I know what will interest you?
Ask me questions, and I will do my best to answer them.
Then, in the first place, do you agree with me that I have a right to be a little masterful,
abrupt, perhaps exacting, sometimes?
On the grounds I stated, namely, that I am old enough to be your father,
and that I have battled through a varied experience with many men of many nations,
and roamed over half the globe, while you have lived quietly with one set of people in one house.
Do as you please, sir.
That is no answer, or rather, it is a very irritating, because a very evasive one.
Reply clearly.
I don't think, sir, you have a right to command me merely because you are older than I,
or because you have seen more of the world than I have.
Your claim to superiority depends on the use you have made of your time and experience.
Hmm, promptly spoken.
But I won't allow that, seeing as it would never suit my case,
as I have made an indifferent, not to say bad, use of both advantages.
Leaving superiority out of the question, then, you must still agree to receive my orders now and then,
without being piqued or hurt by the tone of command, will you?
I smiled. I thought to myself, Mr. Rochester is peculiar.
He seems to forget that he pays me thirty pounds per annum for receiving his orders.
The smile is very well, said he, catching instantly the passing expression.
But speak, too.
I was thinking, sir, that very few masters would trouble themselves to inquire
whether or not their paid subordinates were piqued and hurt by their orders.
Paid subordinate? What? You are my paid subordinate, are you?
Oh, yes, I had forgotten the salary.
Well, then, on that mercenary ground, will you agree to let me hector a little?
No, sir, not on that ground, but on the ground that you did forget it,
and that you care whether or not a dependent is comfortable in his dependency, I agree heartily.
And will you consent to dispense with the great many conventional forms and phrases,
without thinking that the omission arises from insolence?
I am sure, sir, I would never mistake informality for insolence.
One, I rather like. The other, nothing freeborn would submit to, even for a salary.
Humbug! Most things freeborn will submit to anything for a salary.
Therefore keep to yourself, and don't venture on generalities of which you are intensely ignorant.
However, I mentally shake hands with you for your answer, despite its inaccuracy,
and as much for the manner in which it was said, as for the substance of the speech.
The manner was frank and sincere. One does not often see such a manner.
No, on the contrary, affectation, or coldness, or stupid coarse-minded misapprehension of one's meaning,
are the usual rewards of candor.
Not three in three thousand raw schoolgirl governesses would have answered me as you have just done.
But I don't mean to flatter you. If you are cast in a different mould to the majority, it is no merit of yours.
Nature did it. And then, after all, I go too fast in my conclusions.
For what I yet know, you may be no better than the rest.
You may have intolerable defects to counterbalance your few good points.
And so may you, I thought. My eyes met his as the idea crossed my mind.
He seemed to read the glance, answering as if its import had been spoken as well as imagined.
Yes, yes, you are right, said he. I have plenty of faults of my own, I know it,
and I don't wish to palliate them, I assure you. God what, I need not be too severe about others.
I have a past existence, a series of deeds, a colour of life to contemplate within my own breast,
which might well call my sneers and censures from my neighbours to myself.
I started, or rather, for like other defaulters I like to lay half the blame on ill-fortune and adverse circumstances,
was thrust onto a wrong track at the age of one and twenty and have never recovered the right course since.
But I might have been very different. I might have been as good as you, wiser, almost as stainless.
I envy you, your peace of mind, your clean conscience, your unpolluted memory.
Little girl, a memory without blot or contamination must be an exquisite treasure,
an inexhaustible source of pure refreshment, is it not?
How was your memory when you were eighteen, sir?
All right then, limpid, salubrious. No gush of bilge-water had turned it to a fetid puddle.
I was your equal at eighteen, quite your equal. Nature meant me to be on the whole a good man, Miss Eyre,
one of the better kind. And you see I am not so.
You would say you don't see it. At least I flatter myself I read as much in your eyes.
Beware, by the way, what you express with that organ. I am quick at interpreting its language.
Then take my word for it. I am not a villain. You are not to suppose that, not to attribute to me any such bad eminence.
But, owing, I verily believe, rather to circumstances than to my natural bent,
I am a trite commonplace sinner, hackneyed in all the poor petty dissipations with which the rich and worthless try to put on life.
Do you wonder that I avow this to you? Know that in the course of your future life you will often find yourself elected the involuntary confidant of your acquaintance's secrets.
People will instinctively find out, as I have done, that it is not your forte to tell of yourself, but to listen while others talk of themselves.
They will feel, too, that you listen with no malevolent scorn of their indiscretion, but with a kind of innate sympathy,
not the less comforting and encouraging because it is very unobtrusive in its manifestations.
How do you know? How can you guess all this, sir?
I know it well. Therefore I proceed almost as freely as if I were writing my thoughts in a diary.
You would say I should have been superior to circumstances. So I should. So I should, but you see I was not.
When fate wronged me, I had not the wisdom to remain cool. I turned desperate. Then I degenerated.
Now, when any vicious simpleton excites my disgust by his paltry ribaldry, I cannot flatter myself that I am better than he.
I am forced to confess that he and I are on a level. I wish I had stood firm. God knows I do.
Dread remorse when you are tempted to err, Miss Eyre. Remorse is the poison of life.
Repentance is said to be its cure, sir. It is not its cure.
Reformation may be its cure, and I could reform. I have strength yet for that, if.
But where is the use of thinking of it, hampered, burdened, cursed as I am?
Besides, since happiness has irrevocably denied me, I have a right to get pleasure out of life, and I will get it, cost what it may.
Then you will degenerate still more, sir.
Possibly. Yet why should I, if I can get sweet, fresh pleasure?
And I may get it as sweet and fresh as the wild honey the bee gathers on the moor.
It will sting. It will taste bitter, sir.
How do you know? You never tried it.
How very serious, how very solemn you look, and you are as ignorant of the matter as this cameo head.
Taking one from the mantelpiece.
You have no right to preach to me, you neophyte, that have not passed the porch of life, and are absolutely unacquainted with its mysteries.
I only remind you of your own words, sir. You said error brought remorse, and you pronounced remorse the poison of existence.
And who talks of error now? I scarcely think the notion that flittered across my brain was an error.
I believe it was an inspiration rather than a temptation. It was very genial, very soothing, I know that.
Here it comes again. It is no devil, I assure you. Or if it be, it has put on the robes of an angel of light.
I think I must admit so fair a guest when it asks entrance to my heart.
Distrust it, sir. It is not a true angel.
Once more, how do you know? By what instinct do you pretend to distinguish between a fallen seraph of the abyss,
and a messenger from the internal throne, between a guide and a seducer?
I judged by your countenance, sir, which was troubled when you said the suggestion had returned upon you.
I feel sure it will work you more misery if you listen to it.
Not at all. It bears the most gracious message in the world.
For the rest, you are not my conscience-keeper, so don't make yourself uneasy.
Here, come in, Bonnie Wanderer.
He said this as if he spoke to a vision, viewless to any eye but his own.
Then, folding his arms, which he had half extended, on his chest, he seemed to enclose in their embrace the invisible being.
Now, he continued again addressing me, I have received the Pilgrim, a disguised deity, as I verily believe.
Already it has done me good. My heart was a sort of charnel. It will now be a shrine.
To speak truth, sir, I don't understand you at all. I cannot keep up the conversation, because it has got out of my depth.
Only one thing I know. You said you were not as good as you should like to be, and that you regretted your own imperfection.
One thing I can comprehend. You intimated that to have a sullied memory was a perpetual bane.
It seems to me that if you tried hard, you would in time find it possible to become what you yourself would approve,
and that if from this day you began with resolution to correct your thoughts and actions,
you would in a few years have laid up a new and stainless store of recollections, to which you might revert with pleasure.
Justly thought rightly said, Miss Eyre, and at this moment I am paving hell with energy.
Sir?
I am laying down good intentions, which I believe durable as flint.
Certainly, my associates and pursuits shall be other than they have been.
And better?
And better. So much better as pure ore is than foul dross.
You seem to doubt me. I don't doubt myself. I know what my aim is, what my motives are,
and at this moment I pass a law unalterable as that of the Medes and Persians, that both are right.
They cannot be, sir, if they require a new statute to legalize them.
They are, Miss Eyre, though they absolutely require a new statute.
Unheard of combinations of circumstances demand unheard of rules.
That sounds dangerous, Maxim, sir, because one can see at once that it is liable to abuse.
Sententious sage, so it is, but I swear by my household gods not to abuse it.
You are human and fallible.
I am, so are you. What then?
The human and fallible should not irrigate a power with which the divine and perfect alone can be safely entrusted.
What power?
That of saying of any strange, unsanctioned line of action, Let it be right.
Let it be right, the very words you have pronounced them.
May it be right, then, I said, as I rose, deeming it useless to continue a discourse which was all darkness to me.
And besides, sensible that the character of my interlocutor was beyond my penetration, at least beyond its present reach,
and feeling the uncertainty, the vague sense of insecurity which accompanies a conviction of ignorance.
Where are you going?
To put Adele to bed. It is past her bedtime.
You are afraid of me because I talk like a sphinx.
Your language is enigmatical, sir, but though I am bewildered, I am certainly not afraid.
You are afraid. Your self-love dreads a blunder.
In that sense, I do feel apprehensive. I have no wish to talk nonsense.
If you did, it would be in such a grave, quiet manner. I should mistake it for sense.
Do you never laugh, Miss Eyre?
Don't trouble yourself to answer. I see you laugh rarely, but you can laugh very merrily.
Believe me, you are not naturally austere, any more than I am naturally vicious.
The low-wood constraint still clings to you somewhat, controlling your features, muffling your voice, and restricting your limbs.
And you fear in the presence of a man and a brother, or father, or master, or whatever you will.
To smile too gaily, speak too freely, or move too quickly.
But in time, I think you will learn to be natural with me, as I find it impossible to be conventional with you.
And then your looks and movements will have more vivacity and variety than they dare offer now.
I see at intervals the glance of a curious sort of bird through the close-set bars of a cage.
A vivid, restless, resolute captive is there. Were it but free, it would soar cloud-high.
You are still bent on going?
It has struck nine, sir.
Never mind. Wait a minute. Adele is not ready to go to bed yet.
My position, Miss Eyre, with my back to the fire and my face to the room, favours observation.
While talking to you, I have also occasionally watched Adele.
I have my own reasons for thinking her a curious study, reasons that I may, nay, that I shall impart to you some day.
She pulled out of her box about ten minutes ago a little pink silk frock.
Rapture lit her face as she unfolded it.
Coketry runs in her blood, blends with her brains, and seasons the marrow of her bones.
Il faut que je le sais, she cried, et à l'instant même.
And she rushed out of the room.
She is now with Sophie, undergoing a robing process.
In a few minutes she will re-enter, and I know what I shall see.
A miniature of Céline Véran, as she used to appear on the boards at the rising of...
But never mind that.
However, my tenderest feelings are about to receive a shock.
Such is my presentment.
Stay now to see whether it will be realized.
Ere long, Adele's little foot was heard tripping across the hall.
She entered, transformed as her guardian had predicted.
A dress of rose-coloured satin, very short, and as full in the skirt as it could be gathered,
replaced the brown frock she had previously worn.
A wreath of rose-buds circled her forehead.
Her feet were dressed in silk stockings and small white satin sandals.
Est-ce que ma robe va bien? she cried, bounding forward.
Et mes souillets, et mes bras, tenez, je crois que je vais danser.
And spreading out her dress, she chaussait across the room till having reached Mr. Rochester,
she wheeled lightly round before him on tiptoe,
then dropped on one knee at his feet, exclaiming,
Monsieur, je vous remercie mille fois de votre bande.
then rising, she added,
C'est comme cela que m'a faissé, n'est-ce pas, Monsieur?
Precisely was the answer.
And comme cela, she charmed my English gold out of my British britch's pocket.
I have been green too, Miss Ere.
Aye, grass green, not a more vernal tint freshens you now than once freshened me.
My spring is gone, however,
but it has left me that French fleurette on my hands,
which in some moods I would fain be rid of.
Not valuing now the root whence it sprang,
having found that it was of a sort which nothing but gold dust could manure,
I have but half a liking to the blossom.
Especially when it looks so artificial as just now.
I keep it and rear it,
rather on the Roman Catholic principle of expiating numerous sins,
great or small, by one good work.
I'll explain all this some day.
Good night.
Mr. Rochester did, on a future occasion, explain it.
It was one afternoon when he chanced to meet me and Adele in the grounds,
and while she played with Pilate in her shuttlecock,
he asked me to walk up and down a long beach avenue within sight of her.
He then said that she was the daughter of a French opera dancer,
Céline Véran, toward whom he had once cherished what he called a grande passion.
This passion Céline had professed to return with even superior ardor.
He thought himself her idol, ugly as he was.
He believed, as he said, that she preferred his tail d'athlète
to the elegance of the Apollo Belvedere.
And, Miss Eyre, so much was I flattered by this preference
of the Gaelic sylph for her British gnome that I installed her in an hotel,
gave her a complete establishment of servants, a carriage,
cashmere, diamonds, dentelles, etc.
In short, I began the process of ruining myself in the received style,
like any other spoonie.
I had not, it seems, the originality to chalk out a new road to shame and destruction,
but trod the old track with stupid exactness not to deviate an inch from the beaten center.
I had, as I deserved to have, the fate of all other spoonies.
Happening to call one evening when Céline did not expect me, I found her out.
But it was a warm night, and I was tired of strolling through Paris,
so I sat down in her boudoir, happy to breathe the air consecrated so lately by her presence.
No, I exaggerate.
I never thought there was any consecrating virtue about her.
It was rather a sort of pastile perfume she had left, a scent of musk and amber,
than an odor of sanctity.
I was just beginning to stifle with the fumes of conservatory flowers and sprinkled essences
when I bethought myself to open the window and step out onto the balcony.
It was moonlight and gaslight besides, and very still and serene.
The balcony was furnished with a chair or two.
I sat down and took out a cigar.
I will take one now, if you will excuse me.
Here ensued a pause, filled up by the producing and lighting of a cigar.
Having placed it to his lips and breathed a trail of Havana incense
on the freezing and sunless air, he went on.
I liked bonbons, too, in those days, Miss Eyre, and I was croquant,
overlooked the barbarism, croquant chocolate comfits, and smoking alternately,
watching meantime the équipages that rolled along the fashionable streets
toward the neighboring opera house.
When in an elegant closed carriage drawn by a beautiful pair of English horses
and distinctly seen in the brilliant city night, I recognized the voiture I had given Céline.
She was returning.
Of course, my heart thumped with impatience against the iron rails I lent upon.
The carriage stopped, as I had expected, at the hotel door.
My flame.
That is the very word for an opera in Emirata.
Alighted.
Though muffled in a cloak, an unnecessary encumbrance by the bayon so warm a June evening,
I knew her instantly by her little foot seen peeping from the skirt of her dress
as she skipped from the carriage step.
Bending over the balcony, I was about to murmur mon ange, in a tone, of course,
which should be audible to the ear of love alone,
when a figure jumped from the carriage after her, cloaked also.
But that was a spurred heel which had rung on the pavement,
and that was a hatted head which now passed under the arched porte-cochet of the hotel.
You never felt jealousy, did you, Miss Eyre?
Of course not.
I need not ask you.
Because you never felt love.
You have both sentiments yet to experience.
Your soul sleeps.
The shock is yet to be given which shall awaken it.
You think all existence lapses in as quiet a flow
as that in which your youth has hitherto slid away.
Floating on with closed eyes and muffled ears,
you neither see the rocks bristling not far off in the bed of the flood,
nor hear the breakers boil at their base.
But I tell you, and you may mark my words,
you will come some day to a craggy pass in the channel,
where the whole of life's stream will be broken up into whirl and tumult, foam and noise.
Either you will be dashed to atoms on crag-points,
or lifted up and borne on by some master wave into a calmer current, as I am now.
I like this day.
I like that sky of steel.
I like the sternness and stillness of the world under this frost.
I like Thornfield, its antiquity, its retirement,
its old crow-trees and thorn-trees,
its gray façade and lines of dark windows reflecting that metal welkin.
And yet how long have I abhorred the very thought of it,
shunned it like a great plague-house, how I do still abhor.
He ground his teeth and was silent.
He arrested his step and struck his boot against the hard ground.
Some hated thought seemed to have him in its grip,
and to hold him so tightly that he could not advance.
We were ascending the avenue when he thus paused.
The hall was before us.
Lifting his eyes to its battlements,
he cast over them such a glare as I never saw before or since.
Pain, shame, ire, impatience, disgust, detestation,
seemed momentarily to hold a quivering conflict in the large pupil
dilating under his ebon eyebrow.
Wild was the wrestle which should be paramount,
but another feeling rose and triumphed, something hard and cynical,
self-willed and resolute.
It settled his passion and petrified his countenance.
He went on.
During the moment I was silent, Miss Eyre,
I was arranging a point with my destiny.
She stood there by that beach trunk,
a hag like one of those who appeared to Macbeth on the heath of Foras.
You like Thornfield? she said, lifting her finger.
And then she wrote in the air a memento
which ran in lurid hieroglyphics all along the house front
between the upper and lower row of windows.
Like it if you can, like it if you dare.
I will like it, said I, I dare like it, and
he subjoined moodily, I will keep my word.
I will break obstacles to happiness, to goodness, yes, goodness.
I wish to be a better man than I have been, than I am.
As Job's Leviathan broke the spear, the dart, and the habergeon,
hindrances which others count as iron and brass,
I will esteem but straw and rotten wood.
Adele here ran before him with her shuttlecock.
Away! he cried harshly.
Keep at a distance, child, or go into Sophie.
Continuing then to pursue his walk in silence,
I ventured to recall him to the point once he had abruptly diverged.
Did you leave the balcony, sir? I asked.
When mademoiselle Varon entered?
I almost expected a rebuff for this hardly well-timed question,
but on the contrary, waking out of his scowling abstraction,
he turned his eyes towards me, and the shades seemed to clear off his brow.
Oh, I had forgotten, Céline. Well, to resume.
When I saw my charmer thus come in accompanied by a cavalier,
I seemed to hear a hiss, and the green snake of jealousy,
rising on undulating coils from the moonlit balcony,
glided within my waistcoat, and ate its way in two minutes into my heart's core.
Strange.
He exclaimed, suddenly starting again from the point.
Strange that I should choose you for the confidant of all this young lady.
Passing strange that you should listen to me quietly,
as if it were the most usual thing in the world for a man like me to tell stories of his
opera mistresses to a quaint, inexperienced girl like you.
But the last singularity explains the first.
As I intimated once before, you, with your gravity, considerateness, and caution,
were made to be the recipient of secrets. Besides, I know what sort of a mind I have
placed in communication with my own. I know it is one not liable to take infection.
It is a peculiar mind. It is a unique one.
Happily, I do not mean to harm it, but if I did, it would not take harm from me.
The more you and I converse, the better, for while I cannot blight you, you may refresh me.
After this digression, he proceeded.
I remained in the balcony. They will come to her boudoir, no doubt, I thought.
Let me prepare an ambush. So, putting my hands through the open window,
I drew the curtain over it, leaving only an opening through which I could take observations.
Then I closed the casement, all but a chink just wide enough to furnish an outlet to lovers'
whispered vows. Then I stole back to my chair, and as I resumed it, the pair came in.
My eye was quickly at the aperture. Celine's chambermaid entered,
little lamp, left it on the table, and withdrew. The couple were thus revealed to me clearly.
Both removed their cloaks, and there was the Véran, shining in satin and jewels.
My gifts, of course. And there was her companion, in an officer's uniform.
And I knew him for a young rouet of a Vicomte, a brainless and vicious youth whom I had sometimes
met in society, and had never thought of hating because I despised him so absolutely.
Unrecognizing him, the fang of the snake of jealousy was instantly broken,
because at the same moment my love for Celine sank under an extinguisher.
A woman who could betray me for such a rival was not worth contending for. She deserved only scorn.
Less, however, than I, who had been her dupe.
They began to talk. Their conversation eased me completely.
Frivolous, mercenary, heartless, and senseless. It was rather calculated to weary than enrage
a listener. A card of mine lay on the table. This being perceived brought my name under discussion.
Neither of them possessed energy or wit to belabor me soundly,
but they insulted me as coarsely as they could in their little way, especially Celine,
who even waxed rather brilliant on my personal defects. Deformities, as she termed them.
Now it had been her custom to launch out into fervent admiration of what she called my
beauté mal, wherein she differed diametrically from you, who told me point blank at the second
interview that you did not think me handsome. The contrast struck me at the time, and
Adele here came running up again.
Monsieur, John has just been to say that your agent has called and wishes to see you.
Ah, in that case I must bridge. Opening the window, I walked in upon them, liberated Celine
for my protection, gave her notice to vacate her hotel, offered her purse for immediate
exigencies. Disregarded screams, hysterics, prayers, protestations, convulsions,
made an appointment with the Vicomte for a meeting at the Bois de Boulogne. Next morning
I had the pleasure of encountering him, left a bullet in one of his poor etiolated arms,
feeble as the wing of a chicken in the pip, and then thought I had done with the whole crew.
But unluckily, the Véran, six months before, had given me this filette Adele,
who she affirmed was my daughter. And perhaps she may be, though I see no proofs of such
grim paternity written in her countenance. Pilot is more like me than she.
Some years after I had broken with the mother, she abandoned her child,
and ran away to Italy with a musician or singer.
I acknowledge no natural claim on Adele's part to be supported by me, nor do I now acknowledge
any, for I am not her father. But hearing that she was quite destitute, I took the poor thing
out of the slime and mud of Paris and transplanted it here, to grow up clean in the wholesome soil
of an English country garden. Mrs. Fairfax found you to train it, but now you know that it is the
illegitimate offspring of a French opera girl, you will perhaps think differently of your post
and protégé. You will be coming to me some day with notice that you have found another place,
that you beg me to look out for a new governess, etc. Eh?
No. Adele is not answerable for either her mother's faults or yours. I have a regard for her,
and now that I know she is, in a sense, parentless, forsaken by her mother and disowned by you, sir.
I shall cling closer to her than before. How could I possibly prefer the spoiled pet
of a wealthy family, who would hate her governess as a nuisance,
to a lonely little orphan who leans toward her as a friend?
Oh, that is the light in which you view it. Well, I must go in now, and you too, it darkens.
But I stayed out a few minutes longer with the Dellen pilot, ran a race with her,
and played a game of battledore and shuttlecock. When we went in, and I had removed her bonnet and
coat, I took her on my knee, kept her there an hour, allowing her to prattle as she liked,
not rebuking even some little freedoms and trivialities into which she was apt to stray
when much noticed, and which portrayed in her a superficiality of character, inherited probably
from her mother, hardly congenial to an English mind. Still, she had her merits, and I was
disposed to appreciate all that was good in her to the utmost. I sought in her countenance and
features likeness to Mr. Rochester, but found none. No trait, no turn of expression announced
relationship. It was a pity. If she could but have been proved to resemble him, he would have
thought more of her. It was not till after I had withdrawn to my own chamber for the night
that I steadily reviewed the tale Mr. Rochester had told me. As he had said, there was probably
nothing at all extraordinary in the substance of the narrative itself. A wealthy Englishman's
passion for a French dancer and her treachery to him were every day matters enough, no doubt,
in society. But there was something decidedly strange in the paroxysm of emotion which had
suddenly seized him when he was in the act of expressing the present contentment of his mood,
and his newly revived pleasure in the old hall and its environs. I meditated wonderingly on this
incident, but gradually quitting it as I found it for the present inexplicable.
I turned to the consideration of my master's manner to myself.
The confidence he thought fit to repose in me seemed a tribute to my discretion. I regarded
and accepted it as such. His deportment had now for some weeks been more uniform toward me than
at the first. I never seemed in his way. He did not take fits of chilling hauteur. When he
met me unexpectedly, the encounter seemed more welcome. He had always a word and sometimes a
smile for me. When summoned by formal invitation to his presence, I was honored by a cordiality of
reception that made me feel I really possessed the power to amuse him, and that these evening
conferences were sought as much for his pleasure as for my benefit. I indeed talked comparatively
little, but I heard him talk with relish. It was his nature to be communicative. He liked to open
to a mind unacquainted with the world glimpses of its scenes and ways. I do not mean its corrupt
scenes in wicked ways, but such as derived their interest from the great scale on which they were
acted, the strange novelty by which they were characterized. And I had a keen delight in
receiving the new ideas he offered, in imagining the new pictures he portrayed, and following him
in thought through the new regions he disclosed, never startled or troubled by one noxious illusion.
The ease of his manner freed me from painful restraint. The friendly frankness, as correct
as cordial, with which he treated me, drew me to him. I felt at times as if he were my relation
rather than my master. Yet he was imperious sometimes still, but I did not mind that.
I saw it was his way. So happy, so gratified did I become with this new interest added to life,
that I ceased to pine after kindred. My thin crescent destiny seemed to enlarge.
The blanks of existence were filled up. My bodily health improved. I gathered flesh and strength.
And was Mr. Rochester now ugly in my eyes? No, reader. Gratitude, and many associations,
all pleasurable and genial, made his face the object I best liked to see. His presence in a
room was more cheering than the brightest fire. Yet I had not forgotten his faults. Indeed,
I could not, for he brought them frequently before me. He was proud, sardonic, harsh to infuriating,
of every description. In my secret soul I knew that his great kindness to me was balanced by
unjust severity to many others. He was moody too, unaccountably so. I more than once, when sent for,
to read to him, found him sitting in his library alone, with his head bent on his folded arms,
and when he looked up, a morose, almost a malignant scowl blackened his features.
But I believed that his moodiness, his harshness, and his former faults in morality—I say former,
for now he seemed corrected of them—had their source in some cruel cross of fate.
I believed he was naturally a man of better tendencies, higher principles, and purer tastes
than such as circumstances had developed, education instilled, or destiny encouraged.
I thought there were excellent materials in him, though for the present they hung together
somewhat spoiled and tangled. I cannot deny that I grieved for his grief,
whatever that was, and would have given much to assuage it.
Though I had now extinguished my candle and was laid down in bed, I could not sleep for thinking
of his look when he paused in the avenue, and told how his destiny had risen up before him,
and dared him to be happy at Thornfield.
Why not? I asked myself. What alienates him from the house? Will he leave it again soon?
Mrs. Fairfax said he seldom stayed here longer than a fortnight at a time,
and he has now been resident eight weeks. If he does go, the change will be doleful.
Suppose he should be absent spring, summer, and autumn.
How joyless sunshine and fine days will seem!
I hardly know whether I had slept or not after this musing. At any rate, I started wide awake
on hearing a vague murmur, peculiar and lugubrious, which sounded, I thought, just above me.
I wished I had kept my candle burning. The night was drearily dark. My spirits were depressed.
I rose and sat up in bed, listening. The sound was hushed.
I tried again to sleep, but my heart beat anxiously. My inward tranquillity was broken.
The clock, far down in the hall, struck two. Just then it seemed my chamber door was touched,
as if fingers had swept the panels and groping away along the dark gallery outside.
I said, Who is there? Nothing answered. I was chilled with fear.
All at once I remembered that it might be Pilate, who, when the kitchen door chanced to be left
open, not unfrequently found his way up to the threshold of Mr. Rochester's chamber.
I had seen him lying there myself in the mornings. The idea calmed me somewhat. I lay down.
Silence composes the nerves, and as an unbroken hush now reigned again through the whole house,
I began to feel the return of slumber. But it was not fated that I should sleep that night.
A dream had scarcely approached my ear when it fled a-frighted, scared by a marrow-freezing
incident enough. This was a demonic laugh, low, suppressed, and deep, uttered, as it seemed,
at the very keyhole of my chamber door. The head of my bed was near the door,
and I thought at first the goblin laughter stood at my bedside, or rather crouched by my pillow,
but I rose, looked around, and could see nothing, while as I still gazed the unnatural sound was
reiterated, and I knew it came from behind the panels. My first impulse was to rise and
fasten the bolt, my next, again to cry out, Who is there? Something gurgled and moaned.
Ere long, steps retreated up the gallery toward the third-story staircase. A door had lately
been made to shut in that staircase. I heard it open and close, and all was still.
Was that Grace Poole? And is she possessed with a devil? thought I. Impossible now to
remain longer by myself. I must go to Mrs. Fairfax. I hurried on my frock in a shawl.
I withdrew the bolt and opened the door with a trembling hand. There was a candle burning
just outside, and on the matting in the gallery. I was surprised at this circumstance, but still
more was I amazed to perceive the air quite dim, as if filled with smoke. And while looking to
the right hand and left, to find once these blue wreaths issued, I became further aware of a strong
smell of burning. Something creaked. It was a door ajar, and that door was Mr. Rochester's,
and the smoke rushed in a cloud from thence. I thought no more of Mrs. Fairfax. I thought no
more of Grace Poole or the laugh. In an instant I was within the chamber. Tongues of flame darted
round the bed. The curtains were on fire. In the midst of blazing vapor, Mr. Rochester lay
motionless in deep sleep.
Wake! Wake! I cried. I shook him, but he only murmured and turned. The smoke had stupefied him.
Not a moment could be lost. The very sheets were kindling. I rushed to his base in an hour.
Fortunately, one was wide and the other deep, and both were filled with water.
I heaved them up, deluged the bed and its occupant, flew back to my own room,
brought my own water jug, baptized the couch afresh,
and by God's aid succeeded in extinguishing the flames which were devouring it.
The hiss of the quenched element, the breakage of a pitcher which I had flung from my hand
when I had emptied it, and, above all, the splash of the shower-bath I had liberally
bestowed, roused Mr. Rochester at last. Though it was now dark, I knew he was awake,
because I heard him fulminating strange anathemas at finding himself lying in a pool of water.
Is there a flood? he cried. No, sir, I answered. But there has been a fire.
Get up, do. You are quenched now. I will fetch you a candle.
In the name of all the elves in Christendom, is that Jane Eyre? he demanded.
What have you done with me, witch, sorceress? Who is in the room besides you?
Have you plotted to drown me? I will fetch you a candle, sir.
And in heaven's name, get up. Somebody has plotted something.
You cannot too soon find out who and what it is.
There, I am up now, but at your peril you fetch a candle yet.
Wait two minutes till I get into some dry garments, if any dry there be.
Yes, here is my dressing-gown. Now run. I did run. I brought the candle,
which still remained in the gallery. He took it from my hand, held it up,
and surveyed the bed. All blackened and scorched.
The sheets drenched, the carpet round, swimming in water.
What is it, and who did it? he asked. I briefly related to him what had transpired.
The strange laugh I had heard in the gallery, the steps ascending to the third story,
the smoke, the smell of fire which had conducted me to his room, in what state I had found matters
there, and how I had deluged him with all the water I could lay hands on.
He listened very gravely. His face, as I went on,
expressed more concern than astonishment. He did not immediately speak when I had concluded.
Shall I call Mrs. Fairfax? I asked. Mrs. Fairfax? No. What the deuce would you call her for?
What can she do? Let her sleep unmolested. Then I will fetch Leah and wake John and his wife.
Not at all. Just be still. You have a shawl on. If you are not warm enough,
you may take my cloak yonder. Wrap it about yourself and sit down on the armchair.
There, I will put it on. Now place your feet on the stool to keep them out of the wet. I am going
to leave you a few minutes. I shall take the candle. Remain where you are until I return.
Be as still as a mouse. I must pay a visit to the second story. Don't move, remember, or call anyone.
He went. I watched the light withdraw. He passed up the gallery very softly,
unclosed the staircase door with as little noise as possible, shut it after him,
and the last ray vanished. I was left in total darkness. I listened for some noise but heard
nothing. A very long time elapsed. I grew weary. It was cold, in spite of the cloak.
And then I did not see the use of staying, as I was not to rouse the house.
I was on the point of risking Mr. Rochester's displeasure by disobeying his orders when the
light once more gleamed dimly on the gallery wall, and I heard his unshod feet tread the matting.
I hope it is he, thought I, and not something worse. He re-entered, pale and very gloomy.
I have found it all out, he said, setting his candle down on the washstand. It is as I thought.
How, sir? He made no reply, but stood with his arms folded, looking on the ground.
At the end of a few minutes he inquired in a rather peculiar tone.
I forget whether you said you saw anything when you opened your chamber door.
No, sir, only the candlestick on the ground.
But you heard an odd laugh. You have heard that laugh before, I should think, or something like it.
Yes, sir. There is a woman who sews here, called Grace Poole. She laughs in that way.
She is a singular person.
Just so. Grace Poole, you have guessed it. She is, as you say, singular. Very.
Well, I shall reflect on the subject. Meantime, I am glad that you are the only person,
beside myself, acquainted with the precise details of tonight's incident.
You are no talking fool. Say nothing about it. I will account for this state of affairs.
Pointing to the bed. And now, return to your own room.
I shall do very well on the sofa in the library for the rest of the night.
It is near four. In two hours the servants will be up.
Good night, then, sir, said I, departing.
He seemed surprised. Very inconsistently so, as he had just told me to go.
What? he exclaimed. Are you quitting me already, and in that way?
You said I might go, sir.
But not without taking leave. Not without a word or two of acknowledgement and goodwill.
Not, in short, in that brief, dry fashion.
Why, you have saved my life, snatched me from a horrible and excruciating death,
and you walk past me as if we were mutual strangers. At least shake hands.
He held out his hand. I gave him mine. He took it first in one, then in both of his own.
You have saved my life. I have a pleasure in owing you so immense a debt. I cannot say more.
Nothing else that has being would have been tolerable to me in the character of creditor
for such an obligation. But you, it is different. I feel your benefits no burden, Jane.
He paused, gazed at me. Words almost visible trembled on his lips, but his voice was checked.
Good night again, sir. There is no debt, benefit, burden, obligation in the case.
I knew, he continued, you would do me good in some way, at some time. I saw it in your eyes when I
first beheld you. Their expression and smile did not. Again he stopped. Did not. He proceeded
hastily, strike delight into my very inmost heart, so for nothing. People talk of natural
sympathies. I have heard of good, Jeannie. There are grains of truth in the wildest fables,
my cherished preserver. Good night. Strange energy was in his voice, strange fire in his look.
I am glad I happened to be awake, I said, and then I was going.
What? You will go?
I am cold, sir.
Cold. Yes, and standing in a pool. Go then, Jane, go.
But he still retained my hand, and I could not free it. I bethought myself of an expedient.
I think I hear Mrs. Fairfax move, sir, said I.
Well, leave me. He relaxed his fingers, and I was gone.
I regained my couch, but never thought of sleep. Till morning dawned I was tossed on a buoyant but
unquiet sea, where billows of trouble rolled under surges of joy. I thought sometimes I saw
beyond its wild waters ashore, sweet as the hills of Beulah, and now and then a freshening gale,
wakened by hope, bore my spirit triumphantly toward the born. But I could not reach it,
even in fancy. A counteracting breeze blew off land and continually drove me back. Sense
would resist delirium, judgment would warn passion. Too feverish to rest, I rose as soon as day dawned.
XVI.
I both wished and feared to see Mr. Rochester on the day which followed this sleepless night.
I wanted to hear his voice again, yet feared to meet his eye.
During the early part of the morning I momentarily expected his coming.
He was not in the frequent habit of entering the school-room, but he did step in for a few minutes sometimes, and I had the impression that he was sure to visit it that day.
But the morning passed just as usual. Nothing happened to interrupt the quiet course of Adèle's studies.
Only, soon after breakfast, I heard some bustle in the neighbourhood of Mr. Rochester's chamber, Mrs. Fairfax's voice, and Leah's, and the cook's—that is, John's wife—and even John's own gruff tones.
There were exclamations of what a mercy Master was not burnt in his bed. It is always dangerous to keep a candle lit at night. How providential that he had presence of mind to think of the water-junk!
I hope he waked nobody. It is to be hoped that he will not take cold with sleeping on the library sofa, etc.
Too much confabulation succeeded a sound of scrubbing and setting to rights, and when I passed the room, in going downstairs to dinner, I saw through the open door that all was again restored to complete order, only the bed was stripped of its hangings.
Leah stood up in the window seat, rubbing the panes of glass dimmed with smoke. I was about to address her, for I wished to know what account had been given of the affair, but on advancing, I saw a second person in the chamber, a woman sitting on a chair by the bedside, and sewing rings to new curtains. That woman was no other than Grace Poole.
There she sat, staid and taciturn, looking as usual, in her brown-stuffed gown, her check apron, white handkerchief, and cap. She was intent on her work, in which her whole thought seemed absorbed, on her hard forehead, and in her commonplace features, was nothing either of the paleness or desperation one would have expected to see marking the countenance of a woman who had attempted murder, and whose intended victim had followed her last night to her lair, and, as I believed, charged her with the crime she wished to perpetrate.
I was amazed, confounded. She looked up, while I still gazed at her. No start, no increase or failure of colour betrayed emotion, consciousness of guilt, or fear of detection. She said, Good-morning, Miss, in her usual phlegmatic and brief manner, and taking up another ring and more tape, went on with her sewing.
I will put it to the test, thought I, such absolute impenetrability as past comprehension.
Good-morning, Grace, I said. Has anything happened here? I thought I heard the servants all talking together a while ago.
Only Master had been reading in his bed last night. He fell asleep with his candle lit, and the curtains got on fire, but fortunately he awoke before the bed-clothes or the woodwork caught, and contrived to quench the flames with the water in the ewer.
A strange affair, I said, in a low voice. Then, looking at her fixedly, did Mr. Rochester wake nobody? Did no one hear him move?
She again raised her eyes to me, and this time there was something of consciousness in their expression. She seemed to examine me warily, then she answered, The servants sleep so far off, you know, Miss, they would not be likely to hear.
Mrs. Fairfax's room and yours are the nearest to Master's, but Mrs. Fairfax said she heard nothing. When people get elderly, they often sleep heavy.
She paused, then added, with a sort of assumed indifference, but still in a marked and significant tone. But you are young, Miss, and I should say a light sleeper. Perhaps you may have heard a noise.
I did, said I, dropping my voice, so that Leah, who was still polishing the paints, could not hear me, and at first I thought it was Pilot. But Pilot cannot laugh, and I am certain I heard a laugh, and a strange one.
She took a new needle full of thread, waxed it carefully, threaded her needle with a steady hand, and then observed with perfect composure. It is hardly likely Master would laugh, I should think, Miss, when he was in such danger. You must have been dreaming.
I was not dreaming, I said, with some warmth, for her brazen coolness provoked me. Again she looked at me, and with the same scrutinising and conscious eye.
Have you told Master that you heard a laugh? she inquired. I have not had the opportunity of speaking with him this morning.
You did not think of opening your door and looking out into the gallery? she further asked.
She appeared to be cross-questioning me, attempting to draw from me information unawares. The idea struck me, that if she discovered I knew or suspected her guilt, she would be playing of some of her malignant pranks on me. I thought it advisable to be on my guard.
On the contrary, said I, I bolted my door.
Then you are not in the habit of bolting your door every night before you get into bed?
Fiend! she wants to know my habits, that she may lay her plans accordingly.
Indignation again prevailed over prudence. I replied sharply. Hitherto I have often omitted to fasten the bolt. I did not think it necessary. I was not aware any danger or annoyance was to be dreaded at Thornfield Hall. But in future—and I laid marked stress on the words—I shall take good care to make all secure before I venture to lie down.
It would be wise to do so, was her answer. This neighbourhood is as quiet as any I know, and I have never heard of the hall being attempted by robbers since it was a house, though there are hundreds of pounds worth of plate in the plate-closet, as is well known, and you see, for such a large house there are very few servants, because master has never lived here much, and when he does come, being a bachelor, he needs little waiting upon.
But I always think it is best to err on the safe side. A door is soon fastened, and it is as well to have a drawn bolt between one and any mischief that may be about. A deal of people-miss are for trusting all to providence, but I say, providence will not dispense with the means, though he often blesses them when they are used discreetly. And here she closed her harangue, a long one for her, and uttered with the demureness of a quakeress.
I still stood, absolutely dumbfounded at what appeared to me her miraculous self-possession, and the most inscrutable hypocrisy, when the cook entered.
Mrs. Poole, said she, addressing Grace, the servant's dinner will soon be ready. Will you come down?
No, just put my pint of porter and bitter pudding on a tray, and I'll carry it upstairs.
You'll have some meat?
Just a morsel, and a taste of cheese, that's all.
And the sago?
Never mind it at present. I shall be coming down before tea-time. I'll make it myself.
The cook here turned to me, saying that Mrs. Fairfax was waiting for me, so I departed.
I hardly heard Mrs. Fairfax's account of the curtain conflagration during dinner. So much was I occupied in puzzling my brains over the enigmatic character of Grace Poole, and still more in pondering the problem of her position at Thornfield, and questioning why she had not been given into custody that morning, or at the very least dismissed from her master's service.
He had almost as much as declared his conviction of her criminality last night. What mysterious cause withheld him from accusing her? Why had he enjoined me, too, to secrecy?
It was strange. A bold, vindictive, and haughty gentleman seemed somehow in the power of one of the meanest of his dependents, so much in her power, that even when she lifted her hand against his life he dared not openly charge her with the attempt, much less punish her for it.
Had Grace been young and handsome, I should have been tempted to think that tenderer feelings than prudence or fear influenced Mr. Rochester in her behalf. But hard favoured and matronly as she was, the idea could not be admitted.
Yet, I reflected, she has been young once. Her youth would be contemporary with her master's. Mrs. Fairfax told me once she had lived here for many years. I don't think she could ever have been pretty, but for aught I know she may possess originality and strength of character to compensate for want of personal advantages.
Mr. Rochester is an amateur of the decided and eccentric. Grace is eccentric, at least.
What if a former caprice, a freak very possible to a nature so sudden and headstrong as his, has delivered him into her power, and she now exercises over his actions a secret influence, the result of his own indiscretion, which he cannot shake off and dare not disregard?
But having reached this point of conjecture, Mrs. Poole's square, flat figure, and uncomely, dry, even coarse face, recurred so distinctly to my mind's eye, that I thought, no, impossible, my supposition cannot be correct. Yet, suggested the secret voice which talks to us in our own hearts, you are not beautiful either, and perhaps Mr. Rochester approves you. At any rate, you have often felt as if he did, and last night, remember his words, remember his look, remember his voice.
I well remembered all. Language, glance, and tone seemed at the moment vividly renewed. I was now in the schoolroom. Adele was drawing. I bent over her and directed her pencil. She looked up with a sort of start.
Qu'avez-vous, mademoiselle? said she.
I am hot, Adele was stooping. She went on sketching. I went on thinking. I hastened to drive from my mind the hateful notion I had been conceiving respecting Grace Poole. It disgusted me. I compared myself with her and found we were different.
Bessie Leaven had said I was quite a lady, and she spoke truth. I was a lady. And now I looked much better than I did when Bessie saw me. I had more colour and more flesh, more life, more vivacity, because I had brighter hopes and keener enjoyments.
Evening approaches, said I, as I looked toward the window. I have never heard Mr. Rochester's voice or step in the house to-day, but surely I shall see him before night. I feared the meeting in the morning. Now I desire it, because expectation has been so long baffled that it has grown impatient.
When dusk actually closed, and when Adele left me to go and play in the nursery with Sophie, I did most keenly desire it. I listened for the bell to ring below. I listened for Leah coming up with a message. I fancied sometimes I heard Mr. Rochester's own tread, and I turned to the door, expecting it to open and envid him.
The door remained shut. Darkness only came in through the window. Still it was not late. He often sent for me at seven and eight o'clock, and it was yet but six. Surely I should not be wholly disappointed to-night, when I had so many things to say to him.
I wanted again to introduce the subject of Grace Poole, and to hear what he would answer. I wanted to ask him plainly if he really believed it was she who had made last night's hideous attempt, and if so why he kept her wickedness a secret.
It little mattered whether my curiosity irritated him. I knew the pleasure of vexing and soothing him by turns. It was one I chiefly delighted in, and a sure instinct always prevented me from going too far. Beyond the verge of provocation, I never ventured. On the extreme brink, I liked well to try my skill. Retaining every minute form of respect, every propriety of my station, I could still meet him in argument without fear or uneasy restraint. This suited both him and me.
A tread creaked on the stairs at last. Leah made her appearance, but it was only to intimate that tea was ready in Mrs. Fairfax's room. Thither I repaired, glad at least to go downstairs, for that brought me, I imagined, nearer to Mr. Rochester's presence.
"'You must want your tea,' said the good lady, as I joined her. "'You ate so little at dinner.' I am afraid,' she continued, "'you are not well to-day. You look flushed and feverish.' Oh, quite well! I never felt better.'
"'Then you must prove it by evincing a good appetite. Will you fill the teapot while I knit off this needle?' Having completed her task, she rose to draw down the blind, which she had hitherto kept up by way, I suppose, of making the most of daylight, though dusk was now fast deepening into total obscurity.
"'It is fair to-night,' said she, as she looked through the panes, though not starlight, Mr. Rochester has on the whole had a favourable day for his journey.
"'Journey? Is Mr. Rochester gone any where? I did not know he was out.'
"'Oh, he set off the moment he had breakfasted. He has gone to Lees, Mr. Eshton's place, ten miles the other side Millcote. I believe there is quite a party assembled there—Lord Ingram, Sir George Lynn, Colonel Dent, and others.'
"'Do you expect him back to-night?'
"'No, nor to-morrow either. I should think he is very likely to stay a week or more. When these fine fashionable people get together, they are so surrounded by elegance and gaiety, so well provided with all that can please and entertain, they are in no hurry to separate.
"'Gentlemen especially are often in request on such occasions, and Mr. Rochester is so talented and so lively in society that I believe he is a general favourite. The ladies are very fond of him, though you would not think his appearance calculated to recommend him particularly in their eyes, but I suppose his acquirements and abilities, perhaps his wealth and good blood, make amends for any little fault of look.
"'Are there ladies at the Lees?'
"'There are Mrs. Eshton and her three daughters. Very elegant young ladies indeed. And there are the Honourable Blanche and Mary Ingram, most beautiful women, I suppose. Indeed I have seen Blanche six or seven years since, when she was a girl of eighteen.
"'She came here to a Christmas ball and party Mr. Rochester gave. You should have seen the dining-room that day, how richly it was decorated, how brilliantly lit up. I should think there were fifty ladies and gentlemen present, all of the First County families, and Miss Ingram was considered the belle of the evening.
"'You saw her,' you say, Mrs. Fairfax. What was she like?'
"'Yes, I saw her. The dining-room doors were thrown open, and as it was Christmas time, the servants were allowed to assemble in the hall, to hear some of the ladies sing and play. Mr. Rochester would have me to come in, and I sat down in a quiet corner and watched them. I never saw a more splendid scene. The ladies were magnificently dressed, most of them, at least most of the younger ones, looked handsome, but Miss Ingram was certainly the queen.'
"'And what was she like?'
"'Tall, fine bust, sloping shoulders, long graceful neck, olive complexion, dark and clear, noble features, eyes rather like Mr. Rochester's, large and black and as brilliant as her jewels. And then she had such a fine head of hair, raven black and so becomingly arranged, a crown of thick plates behind and in front the longest, glossiest curls I ever saw.
"'She was dressed in pure white. An amber-coloured scarf was passed over her shoulder and across her breast, tied at the side and descending in long fringed ends below her knee. She wore an amber-coloured flower, too, in her hair. It contrasted well with the jetty mass of her curls.
"'She was greatly admired, of course. Yes, indeed, and not only for her beauty, but for her accomplishments. She was one of the ladies who sang, a gentleman accompanied her on the piano. She and Mr. Rochester sang a duet.'
"'Mr. Rochester? I was not aware he could sing. Oh, he has a fine bass voice, and an excellent taste for music.
"'And Miss Ingram, what sort of a voice had she?'
"'A very rich and powerful one. She sang delightfully. It was a treat to listen to her, and she played afterwards. I am no judge of music, but Mr. Rochester is, and I heard him say her execution was remarkably good.
"'And this beautiful and accomplished lady, she is not yet married?'
"'It appears not. I fancy neither she nor her sister have very large fortunes. Old Lord Ingram's estates were chiefly entailed, and the eldest son came for everything almost.
"'But I wonder no wealthy nobleman or gentleman has taken a fancy to her. Mr. Rochester, for instance. He is rich. Is he not?'
"'Oh, yes. But you see there is a considerable difference in age. Mr. Rochester is nearly forty. She is but twenty-five.'
"'What of that? More unequal matches are made every day.'
"'True. Yet I should scarcely fancy Mr. Rochester would entertain any idea of the sort. But you eat nothing. You have scarcely tasted since you began tea.'
"'No, I am too thirsty to eat. Will you let me have another cup?'
"'I was about to revert again to the probability of a union between Mr. Rochester and the beautiful Blanche, but Adele came in, and the conversation was turned into another channel.
"'When once more alone, I reviewed the information I had got, looked into my heart, examined its thoughts and feelings, and endeavoured to bring back with a strict hand such as had been straying through imagination's boundless and trackless waste into the safefold of common sense.
"'Arraigned at my own bar, memory having given her evidence of the hopes, wishes, sentiments I had been cherishing since last night, of the general state of mind in which I had indulged for nearly a fortnight past, reason having come forward and told, in her own quiet way, a plain unvarnished tale,
"'showing how I had rejected the real and rabidly devoured the ideal, I pronounced judgment to this effect, that a greater fool than Jane Eyre had never breathed the breath of life, that a more fantastic idiot had never surfeited herself on sweet lies and swallowed poison as if it were nectar.
"'You,' I said, a favourite with Mr. Rochester, you gifted with the power of pleasing him, you of importance to him in any way.
"'Go, your folly sickens me, and you have derived pleasure from occasional tokens of preference, equivocal tokens, shown by a gentleman of family and a man of the world to a dependent and a novice.
"'How dared you, poor stupid dupe! Could not even self-interest make you wiser? You repeated to yourself this morning the brief scene of last night. Cover your face and be ashamed. He said something in praise of your eyes, did he?
"'Blind puppy, open their bleared lids and look on your own accursed senselessness. It does good to no woman to be flattered by her superior who cannot possibly intend to marry her, and it is madness in all women to let a secret love kindle within them which, if unreturned and unknown, must devour the life that feeds it, and if discovered and responded to, must lead, ignis facius-like, into miry wilds whence there is no end to it.
"'Listen, then, Jane Eyre, to your sentence. Tomorrow, place the glass before you and draw in chalk your own picture, faithfully, without softening one defect. Amid no harsh line, smooth away no displeasing irregularity. Right under it, portrait of a governess, disconnected, poor, and plain.
"'Afterwards, take a piece of smooth ivory. You have one prepared in your drawing-box. Take your palette, mix your freshest, finest, clearest tints, choose your most delicate camel-hair pencils, delineate carefully the loveliest face you can imagine, paint it in your softest shades and sweetest lines, according to the description given by Mrs Fairfax of Blanchingram.
"'Remember the raven ringlets, the oriental eye. What, you revert to Mr Rochester as a model. Order, no snivel, no sentiment, no regret. I will endure only sense and resolution. Recall the august yet harmonious lineaments, the Grecian neck and bust.
"'Let the round and dazzling arm be visible, and the delicate hand. Amid neither diamond ring nor gold bracelet. Portray faithfully the attire, aerial lace and glistening satin, graceful scarf and golden rose. Call it Blanche, unaccomplished lady of rank.
"'Whenever in future you should chance to fancy Mr Rochester thinks well of you, take out these two pictures and compare them. Say, Mr Rochester might probably win that noble lady's love, if he chose to strive for it. Is it likely he would waste a serious thought on this indigent and insignificant plebeian?
"'I'll do it,' I resolved. And having framed this determination, I grew calm and fell asleep.
"'I kept my word. An hour or two sufficed to sketch my own portrait in crayons, and in less than a fortnight I had completed an ivory miniature of an imaginary Blanche Ingram. It looked like a lovely face enough, and when compared with the real head in chalk, the contrast was as great as self-control could desire.
"'I derived benefit from the task. It had kept my head and hands employed, and had given force and fixedness to the new impressions I wished to stamp indelibly on my heart.
"'Ere long, I had reason to congratulate myself on the course of wholesome discipline to which I had thus forced my feelings to submit. Thanks to it, I was able to meet subsequent occurrences with a decent calm, which had they found me unprepared, I should probably have been unequal to maintain, even externally.'
XVII.
A week passed, and no news arrived of Mr. Rochester. Ten days, and still he did not
come. Mrs. Fairfax said she should not be surprised if he were to go straight from the
East to London, and thence to the Continent, and not show his face again at Thornfield
for a year to come. He had not infrequently quitted it in a manner quite as abrupt and
unexpected. When I heard this, I was beginning to feel a strange chill and failing at the
heart. I was actually permitting myself to experience a sickening sense of disappointment,
but rallying my wits, and recollecting my principles, I at once called my sensations
to order. And it was wonderful how I got over the temporary blunder, how I cleared
up the mistake of supposing Mr. Rochester's movements, a matter in which I had any cause
to take a vital interest. Not that I humbled myself by a slavish notion of inferiority.
On the contrary, I just said, You have nothing to do with the master of Thornfield, further
than to receive the salary he gives you for teaching his protégé, and to be grateful
and kind treatment, as, if you do your duty, you have a right to expect at his hands. Be
sure that is the only tie he seriously acknowledges between you and him, so don't make him the
object of your fine feelings, your raptures, agonies, and so forth. He is not of your order.
Keep to your caste, and be too self-respecting to lavish the love of the whole heart, soul,
and strength where such a gift is not wanted, and would be despised.
I went on with my day's business tranquilly, but ever and anon vague suggestions kept wandering
across my brain of reasons why I should quit Thornfield, and I kept involuntarily framing
advertisements and pondering conjectures about new situations. These thoughts I did not think
to check. They might germinate and bear fruit if they could.
Mr. Rochester had been absent upwards of a fortnight when the Post brought Mrs. Fairfax
a letter.
"'It is from the Master,' said she, as she looked at the direction. Now I suppose we
shall know whether we are to expect his return or not.' And while she broke the seal and
perused the document, I went on taking my coffee. We were at breakfast. It was hot,
and I attributed to that circumstance a fiery glow which suddenly rose to my face. Why my
hand shook, and why I involuntarily spilt half the contents of my cup into my saucer,
I did not choose to consider.'
"'Well, I sometimes think we are too quiet. But we run a chance of being busy enough now,
for a little while at least,' said Mrs. Fairfax, still holding the note before her spectacles.
"'Ere I permitted myself to request an explanation, I tied the string of Adele's pinafore, which
happened to be loose. Having helped her also to another bun, and refilled her mug with
I said nonchalantly,
"'Mr. Rochester is not likely to return soon, I suppose.'
"'Indeed he is. In three days, he says. That will be next Thursday, and not alone either.
I don't know how many of the fine people at the Lees are coming with him. He sends directions
for all the best bedrooms to be prepared, and the library and drawing-rooms are to be
cleaned out. I am to get more kitchen-hands from the George Inn at Milkoat, and from wherever
else I can. And the ladies will bring their maids, and the gentlemen their valets. So
we shall have a full house of it.'
And Mrs. Fairfax swallowed her breakfast, and hastened away to commence operations.
The three days were, as she had foretold, busy enough. I had thought all the rooms at
Thornfield beautifully clean and well arranged, but it appears I was mistaken. Three women
were got to help, and such scrubbing, such brushing, such washing of paint and beating
of carpets, such taking down and putting up of pictures, such polishing of mirrors
and lusters, such lighting of fires in bedrooms, such airing of sheets and feather beds on
hearths, I never beheld either before or since. Adèle ran quite wild in the midst of it.
The preparations for company and the prospect of their arrival seemed to throw her into
ecstasies. She would have Sophie to look over all her toilettes, as she called frocks, to
any that were passé, and to air and arrange the new. For herself, she did nothing but
caper about in the front chambers, jump on and off of the bedsteads, and lie on the mattresses
and piled up bolsters and pillows before the enormous fires roaring in the chimneys. From
school duties she was exonerated. Mrs. Fairfax had pressed me into her service, and I was
all day in the storeroom, helping or hindering her and the cook, learning to make custards
and cheesecakes and French pastry, to truss game and garnish dessert dishes.
The party were expected to arrive on Thursday afternoon, in time for dinner at six. During
the intervening period I had no time to nurse chimeras, and I believe I was as active and
gay as anybody Adèle accepted. Still, now and then I received a damping check to my
cheerfulness, and was in spite of myself thrown back on the region of doubts and portents
and dark conjectures. This was when I chanced to see the third-storey staircase door, which
of late had always been kept locked, open slowly and give passage to the form of Grace
Poole in prim cap, white apron, and handkerchief, when I watched her glide along the gallery,
her quiet tread muffled in a list slipper, when I saw her look into the bustling, topsy-turvy
bedrooms, just to say a word, perhaps, to the charwoman about the proper way to polish
a grate, or clean a marble mantelpiece, or take stains from papered walls, and then pass
on. She would thus descend to the kitchen once a day, eat her dinner, smoke a moderate
pipe on the hearth, and go back, carrying her pot of porter with her, for her private
solace in her own gloomy upper haunt. Only one hour in all the twenty-four did she pass
with her fellow servants below. All the rest of her time was spent in some low-sealed oaken
of the second storey. There she sat, and sewed, and probably laughed drearily to herself,
as companionless as a prisoner in his dungeon. The strangest thing of all was that not a
soul in the house except me noticed her habits, or seemed to marvel at them. No one discussed
her position or her employment. No one pitied her solitude or isolation. I once, indeed,
overheard part of a dialogue between Leah and one of the charwomen of which Grace formed
the subject. Leah had been saying something I had not caught, and the charwomen remarked,
"'She gets good wages, I guess.'
"'Yes,' said Leah. "'I wish I had as good. Not that mine are to complain of. There's
no stinginess at Thornfield, but they are not one fifth of the sum Mrs. Poole receives.
And she is laying by. She goes every quarter to the bank at Millcote. I should not wonder,
but she has saved enough to keep her independent if she liked to leave. But I suppose she's
got used to the place, and then she's not forty yet, and strong and able for anything.
It is too soon for her to give up business.'
"'She is a good hand, I dare say,' said the charwoman.
"'Ah, she understands what she has to do. Nobody better,' rejoined Leah significantly.
"'And it is not every one could fill her shoes. Not for all the money she gets.'
"'That it is not,' was the reply. I wonder whether the master—'
The charwoman was going on, but here Leah turned and perceived me, and she instantly
gave her companion a nudge.
"'Doesn't she know?' I heard the woman whisper. Leah shook her head, and the conversation
was of course dropped. All I had gathered from it amounted to this—that there was
a mystery at Thornfield, and that from participation in that mystery I was purposely excluded.
Thursday came. All work had been completed the previous evening. Carpets were laid down,
bed-hangings festooned, radiant white counter-panes spread, toilet-tables arranged, furniture
rubbed, flowers piled in vases. Both chambers and saloons looked as fresh and bright as
hands could make them. The hall, too, was scoured, and the great carved clock, as well
as the steps and banisters of the staircase, were polished to the brightness of glass.
In the dining-room the sideboard flashed resplendent with plate. In the drawing-room and boudoir
vases of exotics bloomed on all sides.
Afternoon arrived. Mrs. Fairfax assumed her best black satin gown, her gloves, and her
gold watch, for it was her part to receive the company, to conduct the ladies to their
rooms, etc. Adèle, too, would be dressed, though I thought she had little chance of
being introduced to the party, that day at least. However, to please her, I allowed Sophie
to apparel her in one of her short full muslin frocks. For myself I had no need to make any
I should not be called upon to quit my sanctum of the school-rooms, for a sanctum it was
now become to me, a very pleasant refuge in time of trouble.
It had been a mild, serene spring day, one of those days which, toward the end of March
or the beginning of April, rise shining over the earth as heralds of summer. It was drawing
to an end now, but the evening was even warm, and I sat at work in the school-room with
the window open.
It gets late, said Mrs. Fairfax, entering in rustling state. I am glad I ordered dinner
an hour after the time Mr. Rochester mentioned, for it is past six now. I have sent John down
to the gates to see if there is anything on the road. One can see a long way from thence
in the direction of Millcote.
She went to the window.
Here he is, said she. Well, John, leaning out, any news?
Their coming man was the answer. They'll be here in ten minutes.
Adèle flew to the window. I followed, taking care to stand on one side, so that, screened
by the curtain, I could see without being seen.
The ten minutes John had given seemed very long, but at last wheels were heard. Four
equestrians galloped up the drive, and after them came two open carriages. Fluttering veils
and waving plumes filled the vehicles. Two of the cavaliers were young, dashing-looking
The third was Mr. Rochester, on his black horse, Miss Ruhr, pilot bounding before him.
At his side rode a lady, and he and she were the first of the party. Her purple riding
habit almost swept the ground, her veil streamed long on the breeze, mingling with its transparent
folds and gleaming through them, shone rich raven ringlets.
Miss Ingram, exclaimed Mrs. Fairfax, and away she hurried to her post below.
The cavalcade, following the sweep of the drive, quickly turned the angle of the house,
and I lost sight of it. Adèle now petitioned to go down, but I took her on my knee and
gave her to understand that she must not on any account think of venturing in sight of
the ladies, either now or at any other time, unless expressly sent for, that Mr. Rochester
would be very angry, etc. Some natural tears she shed on being told this, but as I began
to look very grave, she consented at last to wipe them.
A joyous stir was now audible in the hall. Gentleman's deep tones and ladies' silvery
accents blend harmoniously together, and distinguishable above all, though not loud, was the sonorous
voice of the master of Thornfield Hall, welcoming his fair and gallant guests under its roof.
Then light steps ascended the stairs, and there was a tripping through the gallery,
and soft cheerful laughs, and opening and closing doors, and for a time a hush.
Elle est changeante de toilettes, said Adèle, who listening attentively had followed every
movement, and she sighed.
Chez maman, said she, quand il y avait du monde, je l'a sauvée partout, au salon et
de la loose chambreuse. Souvent je regardais les femmes de chambre coffrées et habillées
les dames, et c'était si amusant, comme celle-là on apprende.
Don't you feel hungry, Adèle? Mais oui, mademoiselle, voire cinq ou six
yeux, qu'en nous n'avons pas mange.
Well now, while the ladies are in their rooms, I will venture down and get you something
to eat. And issuing from my asylum, with precaution, I sought a back-stairs which conducted directly
to the kitchen. All in that region was fire and commotion. The soup and fish were in
the last stage of projection, and the cook hung over her crucibles in a frame of mind
and body threatening spontaneous combustion. In the servants' hall, two coachmen and
three gentleman's gentlemen stood or sat around the fire. The Abigail's, I suppose,
were upstairs with their mistresses. The new servants, that had been hired from Milcote,
were bustling about everywhere.
Threading this chaos, I at last reached the larder. There I took possession of a cold
chicken, a roll of bread, some tarts, a plate or two, and a knife and fork. With this booty
I made a hasty retreat. I had regained the gallery, and was just shutting the back door
behind me, when an accelerated hum warned me that the ladies were about to issue from
their chambers. I could not proceed to the schoolroom without passing some of their doors,
and running the risk of being surprised with my cargo of victualage, so I stood still at
the end, which, being windowless, was dark, quite dark now, for the sun was set and twilight
gathering. Presently the chambers gave up their fair tenants one after another. Each
came out gaily and airily, with dress that gleamed lustrous through the dark. For a moment
they stood grouped together at the other extremity of the gallery, conversing in a key of sweet
subdued vivacity. They then descended down the staircase almost as noiselessly as a bright
mist rolls down a hill. Their collective appearance had left on me an impression of high-born
elegance, such as I had never before received. I found Adele peeping through the schoolroom
door, which she held ajar.
"'What beautiful ladies!' cried she in English. "'Oh, I wish I might go to them. Do you think
Mr. Rochester will send for us by-and-by, after dinner?'
"'No, indeed I don't. Mr. Rochester has something else to think about. Never mind
the ladies to-night. Perhaps you will see them to-morrow. Here is your dinner.' She
was really hungry, so the chicken and tarts served to divert her attention for a time.
It was well I secured this forage, or both she, I, and Sophie, to whom I conveyed a share
of our past, would have run a chance of getting no dinner at all. Every one downstairs was
too much engaged to think of us.
The dessert was not carried out until after nine, and at ten footmen were still running
to-and-fro with trays and coffee-cups. I allowed Adele to sit up much later than usual, for
she declared she could not possibly go to sleep while the doors kept opening and shutting
below, and people bustling about. Besides, she added, a message might possibly come from
Mr. Rochester when she was undressed. Et alors quel dommage!
I told her stories as long as she would listen to them, and then for a change I took her
out into the gallery. The hall lamp was now lit, and it amused her to look over the balustrade
and watch the servants passing backwards and forwards. When the evening was far advanced,
a sound of music issued from the drawing-room, whither the piano had been removed, Adele
and I sat down on the top step of the stairs to listen. Presently a voice blent with the
rich tones of the instrument. It was a lady who sang, and sweet her notes were. The solo
over, a duet followed, and then a glee, a joyous conversational murmur filled up the
intervals. I listened long. Suddenly I discovered that my ear was wholly intent on analyzing
the mingled sounds, and trying to discriminate amidst the confusion of accents those of
Mr. Rochester. And when it caught them, which it soon did, it found a further task in framing
the tones rendered by distance inarticulate into words.
The clock struck eleven. I looked at Adele, whose head leant against my shoulder. Her
eyes were waxing heavy, so I took her up in my arms and carried her off to bed. It was
near one before the gentlemen and ladies sought their chambers.
The next day was as fine as its predecessor. It was devoted by the party to an excursion
to some site in the neighborhood. They set out early in the forenoon, some on horseback,
the rest in carriages. I witnessed both the departure and the return. Miss Ingram, as
before, was the only lady equestrian, and as before, Mr. Rochester galloped at her side.
The two rode a little apart from the rest. I pointed out this circumstance to Mrs. Fairfax,
who was standing at the window with me.
"'You said it was not likely they should think of being married,' said I. But you
see Mr. Rochester evidently prefers her to any of the other ladies.'
"'Yes,' I dare say. No doubt he admires her.'
"'And she him?' I added. Look how she leans her head towards him, as if she were conversing
confidentially. I wish I could see her face. I have never had a glimpse of it yet.'
"'You will see her this evening,' answered Mrs. Fairfax. I happened to remark to Mr.
Rochester how much Adele wished to be introduced to the ladies, and he said, "'Oh, let her
come into the drawing-room after dinner, and request Miss Eyre to accompany her.'
"'Yes, he said that from mere politeness. I need not go, I am sure,' I answered.
"'Well, I observed to him that as you were unused to company, I did not think you would
like appearing before so gay a party, all strangers, and he replied in his quick way,
"'Nonsense! If she objects, tell her it is my particular wish, and if she resists, say
I shall come and fetch her in case of contumency.'
"'I will not give him that trouble,' I answered. I will go, if no better may be. But I don't
like it. Shall you be there, Mrs. Fairfax?'
"'No, I played it off, and he admitted my plea. I'll tell you how to manage, so as
to avoid the embarrassment of making a formal entrance, which is the most disagreeable part
of the business. You must go into the drawing-room while it is empty, before the ladies leave
the dinner-table. Choose your seat in any quiet nook you like. You need not stay long
after the gentlemen come in, unless you please. Just let Mr. Rochester see you are there,
and then slip away. No one will notice you. Will these people remain long, do you think?
Perhaps two or three weeks. Certainly not more. After the Easter recess, Sir George
Lynn, who was lately elected Member for Millcote, will have to go up to town and take his seat.
I dare say Mr. Rochester will accompany him. It surprises me that he has already made so
protracted a stay at Thornfield. It was with some trepidation that I perceived the hour
when I was to repair with my charge to the drawing-room. Adèle had been in a state of
ecstasy all day, after hearing she was to be presented to the ladies in the evening,
and it was not till Sophie commenced the operation of dressing her that she sobered down. Then
the importance of the process quickly steadied her, and by the time she had her curls arranged
in well-smoothed drooping clusters, her pink satin frock put on, her long sash tied, and
her lace mittens adjusted, she looked as grave as any judge. No need to warn her not to disarrange
her attire. When she was dressed, she sat demurely down in her little chair, taking
care previously to lift up the satin skirt, for fear she should crease it, and assured
me she would not stir thence till I was ready. This I quickly was. My best dress, the silver-grey
one, purchased for Miss Temple's wedding and never worn since, was soon put on, my
hair was soon smoothed, my sole ornament, the pearl brooch, soon assumed. We descended.
Fortunately there was another entrance to the drawing-room than that through the saloon
where they were all seated at dinner. We found the apartment vacant, a large fire burning
silently on the marble hearth, and wax candles shining in bright solitude, amid the exquisite
flowers with which the tables were adorned. The crimson curtain hung before the arch,
Slight as was the separation, this drapery formed from the party in the adjoining saloon.
They spoke in so low a key that nothing of their conversation could be distinguished
beyond a soothing murmur. Adele, who appeared still to be under the influence of a most
solemnizing impression, sat down, without a word, on the footstool I pointed out for
her. I retired to a window-seat, and taking a book from a table near, endeavoured to read.
Adele brought her stool to my feet. Ere long she touched my knee.
What is it, Adele?
——Ece que je ne puis pas prendre une seule de ces fleurs magnifiques, mademoiselle,
seulement pour compléter ma toilette.
You think too much of your toilette, Adele, but you may have a flower. And I took a rose
from a vase, and fastened it in her sash. She sighed a sigh of ineffable satisfaction,
as if her cup of happiness were now full. I turned my face away. To conceal a smile
I could not suppress, there was something ludicrous as well as painful in the little
Parisian's earnest and innate devotion to matters of dress.
A soft sound of rising now became audible. The curtain was swept back from the arch.
Through it appeared the dining-room, with its lit luster pouring down light on the silver
and glass of a magnificent dinner-service, covering a long table. A band of ladies stood
in the opening. They entered, and the curtain fell behind them. There were but eight. Yet
somehow as they flocked in, they gave the impression of a much larger number. Some of
them were very tall, many of them were dressed in white, and all had a sweeping amplitude
of a ray that seemed to magnify their persons as a mist magnifies the moon. I rose and curtsied
to them. One or two bent their heads in return. The others only stared at me.
They dispersed around the room, reminding me by the lightness and buoyancy of their
movements of a flock of white plumey birds. Some of them threw themselves in half-reclining
positions on the sofas and ottomans. Some bent over the tables, and examined the flowers
and books. The rest gathered in a group around the fire. All talked in a low but clear tone
which seemed habitual to them. I knew their names afterwards, and may as well mention
them now.
First, there was Mrs. Eshton, and two of her daughters. She had evidently been a handsome
woman, and was well preserved still. Of her daughters, the eldest, Amy, was rather little,
naïve and childlike in face and manner, and piquant in form. Her white muslin dress and
blue sash became her well. The second, Louisa, was taller and more elegant in figure, with
a very pretty face, of that order the French term me-noir chiffon. Both sisters were as
fair as lilies. Lady Lynn was a large and stout personage of about forty, very erect,
very haughty-looking, richly dressed in a satin robe of changeful sheen, her dark hair
shewn glossily under the shade of an azure plume, and within the circlet of a band of
gems.
Mrs. Colonel Dent was less showy, but, I thought, more ladylike. She had a slight figure, a pale
face, and fair hair. Her black satin dress, her scarf of rich foreign lace, and her pearl
ornaments pleased me better than the rainbow radiance of the title Dame. But the three
most distinguished, partly perhaps because the tallest figures of the band, were the
dowager Lady Ingram, and her daughters, Blanche and Mary. They were all three of the loftiest
stature of women. The dowager might be between forty and fifty, her shape was still fine,
her hair, by candlelight at least, still black. Her teeth, too, were still apparently perfect.
Most people would have termed her a splendid woman of her age, and so she was, no doubt,
physically speaking. But then there was an expression of almost insupportable haughtiness
in her bearing and countenance. She had Roman features, and a double chin, disappearing
into a throat like a pillar. These features appeared to me not only inflated and darkened,
but even furrowed with pride, and the chin was sustained by the same principle, in a
position of almost preternatural erectness. She had likewise a fierce and hard eye. It
reminded me of Mrs. Reade's. She mouthed her words in speaking. Her voice was deep,
its inflections very pompous, very dogmatical, very intolerable in short. A crimson velvet
and a shawl turban of some gold-rot Indian fabric invested her, I suppose she thought,
with a truly imperial dignity.
Blanche and Mary were of equal stature, straight and tall as poplars. Mary was too slim for
her height, but Blanche was moulded like a dion. I regarded her, of course, with special
interest. First, I wished to see whether her appearance accorded with Mrs. Fairfax's description.
Secondly, whether it at all resembled the fancy miniature I had painted of her. And
thirdly, it will out, whether it were such as I should fancy, likely to suit Mr. Rochester's
tastes. As far as person went, she added point for point, both to my picture and to Mrs.
Fairfax's description. The noble bust, the sloping shoulders, the graceful neck, the
dark eyes and black ringlets, were all there. But her face—her face was like her mother's,
a youthful, unfurrowed likeness, the same low brow, the same high features, the same
pride. It was not, however, so Saturnine a pride. She laughed continually. Her laugh
was satirical, and so was the habitual expression of her arched and haughty lip.
Genius is said to be self-conscious. I cannot tell whether Miss Ingram was a genius, but
she was self-conscious, remarkably self-conscious indeed. She entered into a discourse on botany
with the gentle Mrs. Dent. It seemed Mrs. Dent had not studied that science, though,
as she said, she liked flowers, especially wild ones. Miss Ingram had, and she ran over
its vocabulary with an air. I presently perceived she was what is vernacularly termed trailing
Mrs. Dent, that is, playing on her ignorance. Her trail might be clever, but it was decidedly
not good-natured. She played, her execution was brilliant. She sang, her voice was fine.
She talked French apart to her mamma, and she talked it well, with fluency and with
a good accent. Mary had a milder and more open countenance
than Blanche, softer features, too, and a skin some shades fairer. Miss Ingram was dark
as a Spaniard. But Mary was deficient in life. Her face lacked expression, her eye luster.
She had nothing to say, and having once taken her seat, remained fixed like a statue in
its niche. The sisters were both attired in spotless white.
And did I now think Miss Ingram such a choice as Mr. Rochester would be likely to make?
I could not tell. I did not know his taste in female beauty. If he liked the majestic,
she was the very type of majesty. Then she was accomplished, sprightly. Most gentlemen
would admire her, I thought, and that he did admire her, I seem already to have obtained
proof. To remove the last shade of doubt, it remained but to see them together.
You are not to suppose, reader, that Adèle has all this time been sitting motionless
on the stool at my feet. No, when the ladies entered, she rose, advanced to meet them,
made a stately reverence, and said with gravity,
Bonjour, mesdames.
And Miss Ingram had looked down at her with a mocking air, and exclaimed,
Oh, what a little puppet!
Lady Lynne had remarked,
It is Mr. Rochester's ward, I suppose, the little French girl he was speaking of.
Mrs. Dent had kindly taken her hand, and given her a kiss. Amy and Louisa Eshton had cried
out simultaneously, What a love of a child!
And then they had called her to a sofa, where she now sat ensconced between them, chattering
in French and broken English, absorbing not only the young lady's attention, but that
of Mrs. Eshton and Lady Lynne, and getting spoiled to her heart's content.
At last coffee is brought in, and the gentlemen are summoned. I sit in the shade, if any shade
there be in this brilliantly lit apartment. The window-curtain half hides me. Again the
arch yawns. They come. The collective appearance of the gentlemen, like that of the ladies,
is very imposing. They are all costumed in black. Most of them are tall, some young.
Henry and Frederick Lynne are very dashing sparks indeed, and Colonel Dent is a fine
soldierly man. Mr. Eshton, the magistrate of the district, is gentleman-like. His hair
is quite white, his eyebrows and whiskers still dark, which gives him something of the
appearance of a noble father of the theatre.
Lord Ingram, like his sisters, is very tall. Like them also he is handsome. But he shares
Mary's apathetic and listless look. He seems to have more length of limb than vivacity
of blood or vigour of brain.
And where is Mr. Rochester?
He comes in last. I am not looking at the arch, yet I see him enter. I try to concentrate
my attention on the netting-needles, on the meshes of the purse I am forming. I wish only
to think of the work I have in my hands, to see only the silver beads and silk threads
that lie in my lap, whereas I distinctly behold his figure, and I inevitably recall the moment
when I last saw it, just after I had rendered him what he deemed an essential service, and
he, holding my hand and looking down in my face, surveyed me with eyes that revealed
a heart full and eager to overflow, in whose emotions I had a part. How near had I approached
him at that moment! What had occurred since, calculated to change his and my relative positions,
yet now how distant, how far estranged we were! So far estranged that I did not expect
him to come and speak to me. I did not wonder when, without looking at me, he took a seat
at the other side of the room, and began conversing with some of the ladies.
No sooner did I see that his attention was riveted on them, and that I might gaze without
being observed, than my eyes were drawn involuntarily to his face. I could not keep their lids under
control. They would rise, and the irises would fix on him.
I looked, and had an acute pleasure in looking, a precious yet poignant pleasure, pure gold
with a steely point of agony, a pleasure like what the thirst-perishing man might feel,
who knows the well to which he has crept his poison, yet stoops and drinks divine draughts
nevertheless. Most true is it that beauty is in the eye of the gazer. My master's colourless
olive face, square massive brow, broad and jetty eyebrows, deep eyes, strong features,
firm grim mouth, all energy, decision, will, were not beautiful, according to rule. Oh,
but they were beautiful to me. They were full of an interest, an influence, that quite mastered
me, that took my feelings from my own power, and fettered them in his.
I had not intended to love him. The reader knows I had wrought hard to extirpate from
my soul the germs of love there detected, and now, at the first renewed view of him,
they spontaneously arrived, green and strong. He made me love him without looking at me.
I compared him with his guests. What was the gallant grace of the lins, the languid elegance
of Lord Ingram, even the military distinction of Colonel Dent, contrasted with his look
of native pith and genuine power? I had no sympathy in their appearance, their expression,
yet I could imagine that most observers would call them attractive, handsome, imposing,
while they would pronounce Mr. Rochester at once harsh-featured and melancholy-looking.
I saw them smile, laugh. It was nothing. The light of the candles had as much soul in it
as their smile. The tinkle of the bell as much significance as their laugh. I saw Mr.
Rochester smile. His stern features softened. His eye grew both brilliant and gentle, its
ray both searching and sweet. He was talking, at the moment, to Louisa and Amy Eshton. I
wondered to see them receive with calm that look which seemed to me so penetrating. I
expected their eyes to fall, their colour to rise under it. Yet I was glad when I found
that they were in no sense moved. He is not to them what he is to me, I thought. He is
not of their kind. I believe he is of mine. I am sure he is. I feel akin to him. I understand
the language of his countenance and movements. Though rank and wealth sever us widely, I
have something in my brain and heart, in my blood and nerves, that assimilates me mentally
to him. Did I say, a few days since, that I had nothing to do with him but to receive
my salary at his hands? Did I forbid myself to think of him in any other light than as
a paymaster? Blasphemy against nature! Every good, true, vigorous feeling I have gathers
impulsively around him. I know I must conceal my sentiments. I must smother hope. I must
remember that he cannot care much for me. For when I say that I am of his kind, I do
not mean that I have his force to influence, and his spell to attract. I mean only that
I have certain tastes and feelings in common with him. I must then repeat continually that
we are forever sundered. And yet, while I breathe and think, I must love him.
Coffee is handed. The ladies, since the gentlemen entered, have become lively as larks. Conversation
waxes brisk and merry. Colonel Dent and Mrs. Eshton argue on politics. Their wives listen.
The two proud dowagers, Lady Lynn and Lady Ingram, confabulate together. Sir George,
whom by the by I have forgotten to describe, a very big and very fresh-looking country
gentleman, stands before their sofa, coffee-cup in hand, and occasionally puts in a word.
Mr. Frederick Lynn has taken a seat beside Mary Ingram, and is showing her the engravings
of a splendid volume. She looks, smiles now and then, but apparently says little. The
tall and phlegmatic Lord Ingram leans with folded arms on the chair-back of the little
and lively Amy Eshton. She glances up at him, and chatters like a wren. She likes him better
than she does Mr. Rochester. Henry Lynn has taken possession of an Ottoman at the feet
of Louisa. Adele shares it with him. He is trying to talk French with her, and Louisa
laughs at his blunders. With whom will blanching grim pair? She is standing alone at the table,
bending gracefully over an album. She seems waiting to be sought. But she will not wait
too long. She herself selects a mate. Mr. Rochester, having quitted the Eshton's, stands
on the hearth as solitary as she stands by the table. She confronts him, taking her station
on the opposite side of the mantelpiece.
—Mr. Rochester, I thought you were not fond of children?
—Nor am I.
—Then what induced you to take charge of such a little doll as that?—pointing to
Adele. Where did you pick her up?
—I did not pick her up. She was left on my hands.
—You should have sent her to school.
—I could not afford it. Schools are so dear.
—Why, I suppose you have a governess for her. I saw a person with her just now. Is
she gone? Oh, no, there she is still, behind the window-curtain. You pay her, of course.
I should think it quite as expensive. More so, for you have them both to keep in addition.
I feared, or should I say I hoped, the illusion to me would make Mr. Rochester glance in my
way, and I involuntarily shrank further into the shade. But he never turned his eyes.
—I have not considered the subject, he said he indifferently, looking straight before
him. No, you men never do consider economy and good sense. You should hear Mama on the
chapter of governesses. Mary and I have had, I should think, a dozen at least in our day,
half of them detestable and the rest ridiculous and all incubi. Were they not, Mama? Did you
speak my own? The young lady, thus claimed as the dowager's special property, reiterated
her question with an explanation. Oh, my dearest, don't mention governesses. The word makes
me nervous. I have suffered a martyrdom from their incompetency and caprice. I thank Heaven
Mrs. Dent here bent over to the pious lady and whispered something in her ear. I suppose
from the answer elicited, it was a reminder that one of the anathematized race was present.
—Tante P., said her ladyship, I hope it may do her good.
Then, in a lower tone, but still loud enough for me to hear, I noticed her. I am a judge
of physiognomy, and in hers I see all the faults of her class.
—What are they, madam? inquired Mr. Rochester aloud.
—I will tell you in your private ear, replied she, wagging her turban three times with portentous
significancy. But my curiosity will be past its appetite. It craves food now. Ask Blanche.
She is nearer you than I.
—Oh, don't refer him to me, Mama. I have just one word to say of the whole tribe. They
are a nuisance. Not that I ever suffered much from them. I took care to turn the tables.
What tricks Theodore and I used to play on our Miss Wilsons and Miss Grays and Madame
Joubert's! Mary was always too sleepy to join in a plot with spirit. The best fun was
with Madame Joubert. Miss Wilson was a poor, sickly thing, lacrimose and low-spirited,
not worth the trouble of vanquishing in short, and Mrs. Gray was coarse and insensible. No
Madame Joubert. I see her yet in her raging passions, when we had driven her to extremities,
spilt our tea, crumpled our bread and butter, tossed our books up to the ceiling, and played
a cherry-vary with the ruler and desk, the fender and fire-irons. Theodore, do you remember
those merry days?
—Yes, to be sure I do, drawled Lord Ingram. And the poor old stick used to cry out, Oh,
you villainous childs! And then we sermonised her on the presumption of attempting to teach
such clever blades as we were, when she herself was so ignorant.
We did. And Tito, you know I helped you in prosecuting, or persecuting, your tutor, way-faced
Mr. Vining, the parson in the PIP, as we used to call him. He and Miss Wilson took the liberty
of falling in love with each other, at least Tito and I thought so. We surprised sundry
glances and sighs, which we interpreted as tokens of la belle passion. And I promised
you the public soon had the benefit of our discovery. We employed it as a sort of lever
to hoist our dead-weights from the house. Dear mamma there, as soon as she got an inkling
of the business, found out that it was of an immoral tendency. Did you not, my lady
mother?
—Certainly my best. And I was quite right. Depend on that. There are a thousand reasons
liaisons between governesses and tutors should never be tolerated a moment in any well-regulated
houses. Firstly—Oh, gracious mammas, spare us the enumeration! All rest we all know them.
Danger of bad example to the innocence of childhood, distractions and consequent neglect
of duty on the part of the attached, mutual reliance and reliance, confidence thence resulting,
insolence accompanying, mutiny and general blow-up. Am I right, Baroness Ingram of Ingram
Park?
—My lily-flower, you are right now as always.
Then no more need be said. Change the subject.
Amy Eshton, not hearing or not heeding this dictum, joined in with her soft infantine
tone. Luisa and I used to quiz our governess too. But she was such a good creature. She
would bear anything. Nothing put her out. She was never cross with us, was she, Luisa?
No, never. We might do what we pleased, ransack her desk and her work-box, and turn her drawers
inside out. And she was so good-natured, she would give us anything we asked for.
I suppose now, said Miss Ingram, curling her lips sarcastically, we shall have an abstract
of the memoirs of all the governesses extant. In order to avert such a visitation, I again
move the introduction of a new topic. Mr. Rochester, do you second my motion?
—Madam, I support you on this point, as on every other.
Then on me be the onus of bringing it forward. Signor Eduardo, are you in voice to-night?
Dona Bianca, if you command it, I will be. Then, Signor, I lay on you my sovereign behest,
to furbish up your lungs and other vocal organs, as they will be wanted on my royal service.
Who would not be the Rizio of so divine a Mary?
—A fig for Rizio! cried she, tossing her head with all its curls, as she moved to the
piano. It is my opinion the fiddler David must have been an insipid sort of fellow.
I like Black Bothwell better. To my mind a man is nothing without a spice of the devil
in him. And history may say what it will of James Hepburn. But I have a notion he was
just the sort of wild, fierce bandit hero to whom I could have consented to gift my
hand.
—Gentlemen, you hear? Now which of you most resembles Bothwell? cried Mr. Rochester.
—I should say the preference lies with you, responded Colonel Dent.
—On my honour, I am much obliged to you, was the reply.
Miss Ingram, who had now seated herself with a proud grace at the piano, spreading out
her snowy robes in queenly amplitude, commenced a brilliant prelude, talking mean-time. She
appeared to be on her high horse to-night. Both her words and her air seemed intended
to excite not only the admiration, but the amazement of her auditors. She was evidently
bent on striking them as something very dashing and daring indeed.
"'Oh, I am so sick of the young men of the present day!' exclaimed she, rattling away
at the instrument. Poor puny things! not fit to stir a step beyond papa's park gates,
nor to go even so far without mamma's permission and guardianship. Creatures so absorbed in
care about their pretty faces, and their white hands, and their small feet, as if a man had
anything to do with beauty, as if loveliness were not the special prerogative of woman,
her legitimate appanage and heritage. I grant an ugly woman is a blot on the fair face of
creation. But as to gentlemen, let them be solicitous to possess only strength and valour.
Let their motto be, Hunt, shoot, and fight, the rest is not worth a Philip. Such should
be my device, were I a man.
"'Whenever I marry,' she continued, after a pause which none interrupted,
"'I am resolved my husband shall be not a rival, but a foil to me. I will suffer no
competitor near the throne. I shall exact an undivided homage. His devotions shall not
be shared between me and the shape he sees in his mirror. Mr. Rochester, now sing, and
I will play for you.'
"'I am all obedience,' was the response.
"'Here, then, is a corsaire song. Know that I dote on corsaires, and for that reason sing
it conspirito. Commands from Miss Ingram's lips would put spirit into a mug of milk and
water. Take care, then. If you don't please me, I will shame you by showing you how things
should be done. That is offering a premium on incapacity. I shall now endeavour to fail.
"'Garde vous en bien. If you err willfully, I shall devise a proportionate punishment.'
Miss Ingram ought to be clement, for she has it in her power to inflict a chastisement
beyond mortal endurance.
"'Ha! explain,' commanded the lady.
"'Pardon me, madame. No need of explodation. Your own fine sense must inform you that one
of your frowns would be a sufficient substitute for capital punishment.'
"'Sing!' said she. And again touching the piano, she commenced an accompaniment in spirited
style.
"'Now is my time to slip away,' thought I. But the tones that then severed the air arrested
me. Mrs. Fairfax had said Mr. Rochester possessed a fine voice. He did—a mellow, powerful
bass into which he threw his own feeling, his own force, finding a way through the ear
to the heart, and there waking sensation strangely. I waited till the last deep and full vibration
had expired, till the tide of talk, checked an instant, had resumed its flow. I then quitted
my sheltered corner, and made my exit by the side door, which was fortunately near.
"'Thence a narrow passage led into the hall. In crossing it, I perceived my sandal was
loose. I stepped to tie it, kneeling down for that purpose on the mat at the floor of
the staircase. I heard the dining-room door unclose, a gentleman come out. Rising hastily,
I stood face to face with him. It was Mr. Rochester.
"'How do you do?' he asked.
"'I am very well, sir.'
"'Why did you not come and speak to me in the room?'
"'I thought I might have retorted the question on him who put it, but I would not take that
freedom. I answered, I did not wish to disturb you, as you seemed engaged, sir.'
"'What have you been doing in my absence?'
"'Nothing particular, teaching a dell as usual.'
"'And getting a good deal paler than you were, as I saw at first sight. What is the matter?'
"'Nothing at all, sir.'
"'Did you take any cold that night you half-drowned me?'
"'Not in the least.'
"'Return to the drawing-room. You are deserting too early.'
"'I am tired, sir.'
He looked at me for a minute.
"'And a little depressed, he said. What about? Tell me.'
"'Nothing, nothing, sir. I am not depressed.'
"'But I affirm that you are. So much depressed that a few more words would bring tears to your eyes.
Indeed, they are there now, shining and swimming, and a bead has slipped from the lash and fallen
on to the flag. If I had time, and was not in mortal dread of some prating prig of a servant
passing, I would know what all this means. Well, to-night I excuse you. But understand that,
so long as my visitors stay, I expect you to appear in the drawing-room every evening.
It is my wish. Don't neglect it. Now go and send Sophie for a dell. Good night, my—'
He stopped, bit his lip, and abruptly left me.
18.
Merry days were these at Thornfield Hall, and busy days too.
How different from the first three months of stillness, monotony, and solitude I had
passed beneath its roof!
All sad feelings seemed now driven from the house, all gloomy associations forgotten.
There was life everywhere, movement all day long.
You could not now traverse the gallery, once so hushed, nor enter the front chambers, once
so tenantless, without encountering a smart lady's maid or a dandy valet.
The kitchen, the butler's pantry, the servant's hall, the entrance hall were equally alive,
and the saloons were only left void and still when the blue sky and halcyon sunshine of
the genial spring weather called their occupants out into the grounds.
Even when that weather was broken, and continuous rain set in for some days, no damp seemed
cast over enjoyment.
Indoor amusements only became more lively and varied, in consequence of the stop put
to outdoor gaiety.
I wondered what they were going to do the first evening a change of entertainment was
proposed.
They spoke of playing charades, but in my ignorance I did not understand the term.
The servants were called in, the dining-room tables wheeled away, the lights otherwise
disposed, the chairs placed in a semi-circle opposite the arch.
While Mr. Rochester and the other gentlemen directed these alterations, the ladies were
running up and down stairs, ringing for their maids.
Mrs. Fairfax was summoned to give information respecting the resources of the house in shawls,
draperies of any kind, and certain wardrobes of the third story were ransacked, and their
contents, in the shape of brocaded and hooped petticoats, satin sacks, black modes, lace
lapettes, etc., were brought down in the armfuls by the Abigail's.
Then a selection was made, and such things as were chosen were carried to the boudoir
within the drawing-room.
Meantime Mr. Rochester had again summoned the ladies around him, and was selecting certain
of their number to be of his party.
"'Miss Ingram is mine, of course,' said he.
Afterwards he named the two Mrs. Eshton and Mrs. Dent.
He looked at me, I happened to be near him, as I had been fastening the clasp of Mrs.
Dent's bracelet, which had gotten loose.
"'Will you play?' he asked.
I shook my head.
He did not insist, which I rather feared he would have done.
He allowed me to return quietly to my usual seat.
He and his aides now withdrew behind the curtain.
The other party, which was headed by Colonel Dent, sat down on the crescent of chairs.
One of the gentlemen, Mr. Eshton, observing me, seemed to propose that I should be asked
to join them, but Lady Ingram instantly negatived the notion.
"'No,' I heard her say.
She looks too stupid for any game of the sort.'
Ere long a bell tinkled, and the curtain drew up.
Within the arch, the bulky figure of Sir George Lynn, whom Mr. Rochester had likewise chosen,
was seen enveloped in a white sheet.
Before him, on a table, lay open a large book, and at his side stood Amy Eshton, draped in
Mr. Rochester's cloak and holding a book in her hand.
Somebody unseen rang a bell merrily, then Adèle, who had insisted on being one of her
guardians' party, bounded forward, scattering round her the contents of a basket of flowers
she carried on her arm.
Then appeared the magnificent figure of Miss Ingram, clad in white, a long veil on her
head, and a wreath of roses round her brow.
By her side walked Mr. Rochester, and together they drew near the table.
They knelt, while Mrs. Dent and Louisa Eshton, dressed also in white, took up their stations
behind them.
A ceremony followed, in dumb show, in which it was easy to recognize the pantomime of
a marriage.
At its termination, Colonel Dent and his party consulted in whispers for two minutes, then
the Colonel called out,
"'Bride!'
Mr. Rochester bowed, and the curtain fell.
A considerable interval elapsed before it rose again.
Its second rising displayed a more elaborately prepared scene than the last.
The drawing-room, as I have before observed, was raised two steps above the dining-room,
and on the top of the upper step, placed a yard or two back within the room, appeared
a large marble basin, which I recognized as an ornament of the Conservatory, where it
usually stood, surrounded by exotics and tenanted by goldfish, and whence it must have been
transported with some trouble, on account of its size and weight.
Seated on the table, by the side of this basin, was seen Mr. Rochester, costumed in shawls,
with a turban on his head.
His dark eyes and swarthy skin and panum features suited the costume exactly.
He looked the very model of an Eastern emir, an agent or a victim of the bow-string.
Presently advanced into view Miss Ingram.
She too was attired in Oriental fashion, a crimson scarf tied sash-like round the waist,
an embroidered handkerchief knotted about her temples, her beautifully molded arms bare,
one of them upraised in the act of supporting a pitcher, poised gracefully on her head.
Both her cast of form and feature, her complexion and her general air, suggested the idea of
some Israeliteish princess of the patriarchal days, and such was doubtless the character
she intended to represent.
She approached the basin, and bent over it as if to fill her pitcher.
She again lifted it to her head.
The personage on the well-brink now seemed to accost her to make some request.
She hasted, let down her pitcher on her hand, and gave him to drink.
From the bosom of his robe, then produced a casket, opened it, and showed magnificent
bracelets and earrings, she acted astonishment and admiration.
Kneeling he laid the treasure at her feet.
In credulity and delight were expressed by her looks and gestures.
The stranger fastened the bracelets on her arms and the rings in her ears.
It was Eliezer and Rebecca.
The camels only were wanting.
The divining party again laid their heads together.
Apparently it could not agree about the word or syllable the scene illustrated.
Colonel Dent, their spokesman, demanded the tableau of the whole, whereupon the curtain
again descended.
On its third rising, only a portion of the drawing-room was disclosed, the rest being
concealed by a screen, hung with some sort of dark and coarse drapery.
The marble basin was removed.
In its place stood a deal table and a kitchen chair.
These objects were visible by a very dim light proceeding from a horn lantern, the wax candles
being all extinguished.
Amidst this sordid scene sat a man with his clenched hands resting on his knees, and
his eyes bent on the ground.
I knew Mr. Rochester, though the begrimed face, the disordered dress, his coat hanging
loose from one arm, as if it had been almost torn from his back in a scuffle.
The desperate and scowling countenance, the rough bristling hair, might well have disguised
him.
As he moved, a chain clanked.
To his wrists were attached fetters.
Bridewell, exclaimed Colonel Dent, and the charade was solved.
A sufficient interval having elapsed for the performers to resume their ordinary costume,
they re-entered the dining-room.
Mr. Rochester led in Miss Ingram.
She was complimenting him on his acting.
"'Do you know,' said she, "'that of the three characters I liked you in the last best?
Oh, had you but lived a few years earlier, what a gallant gentleman-high-woman you would
have made!'
"'Is all the soot washed from my face?' he asked, turning it toward her.
"'Alas, yes, the more's the pity.
Nothing could be more becoming to your complexion than Ruffian's rouge.
You would like a hero of the road, then?'
An English hero of the road would be the next best thing to an Italian bandit, and that
could only be surpassed by a Levantine pirate.
Well, whatever I am, remember you are my wife.
We were married an hour since, in the presence of all these witnesses.'
She giggled, and her colour rose.
"'Now, Dent,' continued Mr. Rochester, "'it is your turn.'
And as the other party withdrew, he and his band took the vacated seats.
Miss Ingram placed herself at her leader's right hand.
The other diviners filled the chairs on either side of him and her.
I did not now watch the actors.
I no longer waited with interest for the curtain to rise.
My attention was absorbed by the spectators.
My eyes, air while fixed on the arch, were now irresistibly attracted to the semicircle
of chairs.
What charade Colonel Dent and his party played, what word they chose, how they acquitted themselves,
I no longer remember.
But I still see the consultation which followed each scene.
I see Mr. Rochester turn to Miss Ingram, and Miss Ingram to him.
I see her incline her head towards him till the jetty curls almost touch his shoulder
and wave against his cheek.
I hear their mutual whisperings.
I recall their interchanged glances, and something even of the feeling roused by the spectacle
returns in memory at this moment.
I have told you, reader, that I had learned to love Mr. Rochester.
I could not unlove him now, merely because I found that he had ceased to notice me, because
I might pass hours in his presence, and he would never once turn his eyes in my direction,
because I saw all his attentions appropriated by a great lady who scorned to touch me with
the hem of her robes as she passed, who, if ever her dark and imperious eye fell on
me by chance, would withdraw it instantly, as from an object too mean to merit observation.
I could not unlove him, because I felt sure he would soon marry this very lady, because
I read daily in her a proud security in his intentions respecting her, because I witnessed
hourly in him a style of courtship which, if careless and choosing rather to be sought
than to seek, was yet in its very carelessness captivating, and in its very pride irresistible.
There was nothing to cool or banish love in these circumstances, though much to create
despair. Much too, you will think, reader, to engender jealousy, if a woman in my position
could presume to be jealous of a woman in Miss Ingram's. But I was not jealous, or
very rarely. The nature of the pain I suffered could not be explained by that word. Miss
Ingram was a mark beneath jealousy. She was too inferior to excite the feeling. Pardon
the seeming paradox, I mean what I say. She was very showy, but she was not genuine. She
had a fine person, many brilliant attainments, but her mind was poor, her heart barren by
nature. Nothing bloomed spontaneously on that soil, no unforced natural fruit delighted
by its freshness. She was not good. She was not original. She used to repeat sounding
phrases from books. She never offered or had an opinion of her own. She advocated a high
tone of sentiment, but she did not know the sensations of sympathy and pity. Tenderness
and truth were not in her. Too often she betrayed this. By the undue vent she gave to a spiteful
antipathy she had conceived against little Adèle, pushing her away with some contumilius
epithet if she happened to approach her, sometimes ordering her from the room, and always treating
her with coldness and acrimony. Other eyes besides mine watched these manifestations
of character, watched them closely, keenly, shrewdly. Yes, the future bridegroom, Mr.
Rochester himself, exercised over his intended a ceaseless surveillance, and it was from
this sagacity, this guardedness of his, this perfect clear consciousness of his fair one's
defects, this obvious absence of passion in his sentiments towards her, that my ever-torturing
pain arose. I saw that he was going to marry her for family, perhaps political reasons,
because her rank and connections suited him. I felt he had not given her his love, and
that her qualifications were ill-adapted to win from him that treasure. This was the point.
This was where the nerve was touched and teased. This was where the fever was sustained and
fed. She could not charm him. If she had managed the victory at once, and
he had yielded, and sincerely laid his heart at her feet, I should have covered my face,
turned to the wall, and figuratively have died to them. If Miss Ingram had been a good
and noble woman, endowed with force, fervour, kindness, sense, I should have had one vital
struggle with two tigers, jealousy and despair. Then my heart torn out and devoured, I should
have admired her, acknowledged her excellence, and been quiet for the rest of my days. And
the more absolute her superiority, the deeper would have been my admiration, the more truly
tranquil my quiescence. But as matters really stood, to watch Miss Ingram's efforts at
fascinating Mr. Rochester, to witness their repeated failure, herself unconscious that
they did fail, vainly fancying that each shaft hit the mark, and infatuatedly pluming herself
on success, when her pride and self-complacency repelled further and further what she wished
to allure, to witness this was to be at once under ceaseless excitation and ruthless restraint.
Because when she failed, I saw how she might have succeeded. Arrows that continually glanced
off from Mr. Rochester's breast, and fell harmless at his feet, might, I knew, if shot
by a surer hand, have quivered keen in his proud heart, have called love into his stern
eye and softness into his sardonic face, or better still, without weapons, a silent conquest
might have been won. Why can she not influence him more when she is privileged to draw so
near to him? I asked myself. Surely she cannot truly like him, or not like him with true
affection. If she did, she need not coin her smile so lavishly, flash her glances so unremittingly,
manufacture airs so elaborate, graces so multitudinous. It seems to me that she might, by merely
sitting quietly at his side, saying little and looking less, get nigher his heart.
I have seen in his face a far different expression from that which hardens it now, while she
is so vivaciously accosting him. But then it came of itself. It was not elicited by
meretricious arts and calculated manoeuvres, and one had but to accept it, to answer what
he asked without pretension, to address him when needful, without grimace, and it increased,
and grew kindlier and more genial, and warmed one like a fostering sunbeam. How will she
manage to please him when they are married? I do not think she will manage it, and yet
it might be managed, and his wife might, I verily believe, be the very happiest woman
the sun shines on.
I have not yet said anything condemnatory of Mr. Rochester's project of marrying for
interest and connections. It surprised me when I first discovered that such was his
intention. I had thought him a man unlikely to be influenced by motives so commonplace
in his choice of a wife. But the longer I considered the position, education, etc. of
the parties, the less I felt justified in judging and blaming either him or Miss Ingram
for acting in conformity to ideas and principles instilled into them, doubtless from their
childhood. All their class held these principles. I supposed, then, that they had reasons for
holding them such as I could not fathom. It seemed to me that, were I a gentleman like
him, I would take to my bosom only such a wife as I could love. But the very obviousness
to the husband's own happiness offered by this plan convinced me that there must be
arguments against its general adoption of which I was quite ignorant. Otherwise I felt
sure all the world would act as I wished to act.
But in other points, as well as this, I was growing very lenient to my master. I was forgetting
all his faults, for which I had once kept a sharp look-out. It had formerly been my
endeavour to study all sides of his character, to take the bad with the good, and from the
trust weighing of both, to form an equitable judgment. Now I saw no bad. The sarcasm that
had repelled, the harshness that had startled me once, were only like keen condiments in
a choice dish. Their presence was pungent, but their absence would be felt as comparatively
insipid. And as for the vague something, was it a sinister or a sorrowful, a designing
or a desponding expression, that opened upon a careful observer now and then in his eye,
and closed again before one could fathom the strange depth partially disclosed? That something
which used to make me fear and shrink, as if I had been wandering amongst volcanic-looking
hills, and had suddenly felt the ground quiver and seen it gape, that something I, at intervals,
beheld still, and with throbbing heart, but not with palsied nerves. Instead of wishing
to shun, I longed only to dare, to divine it, and I thought Miss Ingram happy because
one day she might look into the abyss at her leisure, explore its secrets, and analyse
their nature. Meantime, while I thought only of my master and his future bride, saw only
them, heard only their discourse, and considered only their movements of importance, the rest
of the party were occupied with their own separate interests and pleasures. The ladies
Lin and Ingram continued to consort in solemn conferences when they nodded their two turbans
and held up their forehands in confronting gestures of surprise or mystery or horror,
according to the theme on which their gossip ran, like a pair of magnified puppets. Mild
Mrs. Dent talked with good-natured Mrs. Eshton, and the two sometimes bestowed a courteous
word or smile on me. Sir George Lin, Colonel Dent, and Mr. Eshton discussed politics or
county affairs or justice business. Lord Ingram flirted with Amy Eshton. Louisa played and
sang to and with one of the messers Lin, and Mary Ingram listened languidly to the gallant
speeches of the other. Sometimes all, as with one consent, suspended their by-play to observe
and listen to the principal actors, for, after all, Mr. Rochester and, because closely connected
with him, Miss Ingram, were the life and soul of the party. If he was absent from the room
an hour, a perceptible dullness seemed to steal over the spirits of his guests, and
his re-entrance was sure to give a fresh impulse to the vivacity of conversation.
The want of his animating influence appeared to be peculiarly felt on one day that he had
been summoned to Millcote on business, and was not likely to return until late. The afternoon
was wet. A walk the party had proposed to take to see a gypsy camp, lately pitched on
a common beyond Hay, was consequently deferred. Some of the gentlemen were gone to the stables.
The younger ones, together with the younger ladies, were playing billiards in the billiard-room.
The dowagers Ingram and Lin sought solace in a quiet game at cards. Blanche Ingram,
after having repelled by supercilious taciturnity some efforts of Mrs. Dent and Mrs. Eshton
to draw her into conversation, had first murmured over some sentimental tunes and eras on the
piano, and then, having fetched a novel from the library, had flung herself in haughty
on a sofa, and prepared to beguile, by the spell of fiction, the tedious hours of absence.
The room and house were silent. Only now and then the merriment of the billiard-players
was heard from above. It was verging on dusk, and the clock had already given warning of
the hour to dress for dinner, when little Adèle, who knelt by me in the drawing-room
window-seat, suddenly exclaimed,
I turned, and Miss Ingram darted forward from her sofa. The others, too, looked up from
their several occupations, for at the same time a crunching of wheels and a splashing
tramp of horse-hooves became audible on the wet gravel. A post-chase was approaching.
"'What can possess him to come home in that style?' said Miss Ingram. He rode Monsieur
the black horse, did he not, when he went out, and Pilot was with him. What has he done
with the animals?' As she said this, she approached her tall person and ample garments
so near the window that I was obliged to bend back almost to the breaking of my spine. In
her eagerness she did not observe me at first, but when she did, she curled her lip and moved
to another casement. The post-chase stopped. The driver rang the door-bell, and a gentleman
alighted in travelling garb. But it was not Mr. Rochester. It was a tall, fashionable-looking
man, a stranger.
"'How provoking!' exclaimed Miss Ingram. "'You tiresome monkey!' apostrophising
Adele, who perched you up in the window to give false intelligence. And she cast on me
an angry glance, as if I were in fault. Some parlaying was audible in the hall, and soon
the newcomer entered. He bowed to Lady Ingram, as deeming her the eldest lady present.
"'It appears I come at an inopportune time, madam,' said he, when my friend Mr. Rochester
is from home. But I arrive from a very long journey, and I think I may presume so far
on old and intimate acquaintance as to install myself here till he returns. His manner was
polite. His accent, in speaking, struck me as being somewhat unusual, not precisely foreign,
but still not altogether English. His age might be about Mr. Rochester's, between thirty
and forty. His complexion was singularly sallow. Otherwise he was a fine-looking man, at first
quite especially. On closer examination you detected something in his face that displeased,
or rather that failed to please. His features were regular, but too relaxed. His eye was
large and well cut, but the life looking out of it was a tame vacant life. At least so
I thought. The sound of the dressing-bell dispersed the
party. It was not quite till after dinner that I saw him again. He seemed quite a disease.
But I liked his physiognomy even less than before. It struck me as being at the same
time unsettled and inanimate. His eye wandered, and had no meaning in its wandering. This
gave him an odd look, such as I never remembered to have seen. For a handsome and not an unamiable
looking man, he repelled me exceedingly. There was no power in that smooth-skinned face of
a full oval shape, no firmness in that aquiline nose and small cherry mouth. There was no thought
on the low even forehead, no command in the blank brown eye. As I sat in my usual nook,
and looked at him with the light of the gerundoles on the pantalpiece beaming full over him,
for he occupied an armchair drawn close to the fire, and kept shrinking still nearer
as if he were cold, I compared him with Mr. Rochester. I think, with deference be it spoken,
the contrast could not be much greater between a sleek gander and a fierce falcon, between
a meek sheep and the rough-coated keen-eyed dog, its guardian. He had spoken of Mr. Rochester
as an old friend. A curious friendship theirs must have been, a pointed illustration indeed
of the old adage that extremes meet. Two or three of the gentlemen sat near him, and I
caught at times scraps of their conversation across the room. At first I could not make
much sense of what I had heard, for the discourse of Louisa Eshton and Mary Ingram, who sat
confused the fragmentary sentences that reached me at intervals. These last were discussing
the stranger. They both called him a beautiful man. Louisa said he was a love of a creature,
and she adored him, and Mary instanced his pretty little mouth and nice nose as her ideal
of the charming.
"'And what sweet-tempered forehead he has!' cried Louisa. "'So smooth! None of those
acid eye and smile!'
And then, to my great relief, Mr. Henry Lyne summoned them to the other side of the room,
to settle some point about the deferred excursion to Haycommon.
I was now able to concentrate my attention on the group by the fire, and I presently
gathered that the new-comer was called Mr. Mason. Then I learned that he was but just
arrived in England, and that he came from some hot country, which was the reason doubtless
his face was so sallow, and he sat so near the hearth, and wore a shirt-out in the house.
Presently the words Jamaica, Kingston, Spanish Town, indicated the West Indies as his residence,
and it was with no little surprise that I gathered ere long that he had first seen and
become acquainted with Mr. Rochester. He spoke of his friend's dislike of the burning heats,
the hurricanes, and the rainy seasons of that region. I knew Mr. Rochester had been
Mrs. Fairfax had said so, but I thought the continent of Europe had bounded his wanderings.
Till now I had never heard a hint given of visits to more distant shores. I was pondering
these things when an incident, and a somewhat unexpected one, broke the thread of my musings.
Mr. Mason, shivering as some one chanced to open the door, asked for more coal to be put
on the fire, which had burnt out its flame, though its mass of cinder still shone hot
and red. The footman who had brought the coal in going out stopped near Mr. Eshton's chair,
and said something to him in a low voice, of which I heard only the words, Old Woman,
quite troublesome.
"'Tell her she shall be put in the stocks if she does not take herself off,' replied
the magistrate.
"'No stop,' interrupted Colonel Dent. "'Don't send her away, Eshton. We might turn the
thing to account. Better consult the ladies.' And speaking aloud, he continued, "'Ladies,
you talked of going to Hay Common to visit the gypsy camp. Sam here says that one of
the old mother-bunches is in the servants' hall at this moment, and insists upon being
brought in before the quality to tell them their fortunes. Would you like to see her?'
"'Surely, Colonel,' cried Lady Ingram, "'you would not encourage such a low imposter.
Dismiss her by all means at once.'
"'I cannot persuade her to go away, my lady,' said the footman, "'nor can any of the servants.
Mrs. Fairfax is with her just now, entreating her to be gone. But she has taken a chair
in the chimney-corner, and says nothing shall stir her from it till she gets leave to come
in here.'
"'What does she want?' asked Mrs. Eshton.
"'To tell the gentry their fortunes,' she says, ma'am. She swears she must and will
do it.'
"'What does she like?' inquired the Mrs. Eshton, in a breath.
"'A shockingly ugly old creature, Miss, almost as black as a croc.'
"'Why, she's a real sorceress,' cried Frederick Lynn.
"'Let us have her in, of course.'
"'To be sure,' rejoined his brother,
"'it would be a thousand pities to throw away such a chance of fun.'
"'My dear boys, what are you thinking about?' exclaimed Mrs. Lynn.
"'I cannot possibly countenance any such inconsistent proceeding,' chimed in the dowager Ingram.
"'Indeed, ma'am, but you can, and will,' pronounced the haughty voice of Blanche,
as she turned round on the piano-stool, where till now she had sat silent, apparently examining
sundry sheets of music.
"'I have a curiosity to hear my fortune told. Therefore, Sam, order the beldame forward.'
"'My darling Blanche, recollect.'
"'I do. I recollect all you can suggest, and I must have my will. Quick, Sam.'
"'Yes, yes, yes,' cried all the juveniles, both ladies and gentlemen.
"'Let her come. It will be excellent sport.'
The footman still lingered.
"'She looks such a rough one,' said he.
"'Go!' ejaculated Miss Ingram. And the man went.
Excitement instantly seized the whole party.
A running fire of raillery and jests was proceeding when Sam returned.
"'She won't come now,' said he.
"'She says it's not her mission to appear before the vulgar herd.
"'Them's her words. I must show her into a room by herself,
and then those who wish to consult her must go to her one by one.'
"'You see now, my queenly Blanche,' began Lady Ingram.
"'She encroaches. Be advised, my angel girl, and—'
"'Show her into the library, of course,' cut in the angel girl.
"'It is not my mission to listen to her before the vulgar herd, either.
I mean to have her all to myself. Is there a fire in the library?'
"'Yes, ma'am. But she looks such a tinkler.'
"'Cease that chatter, blockhead, and do my bidding.'
Again Sam vanished, and mystery, animation, expectation rose to full
flow once more. "'She's ready now,' said the footman, as he reappeared.
"'She wishes to know who will be her first visitor.'
"'I think I had better just look in upon her before any of the ladies go,'
said Colonel Dent. "'Tell her Sam a gentleman is coming.'
Sam went, and returned. "'She says, sir, that she'll have no gentleman.
They need not trouble themselves to come near her.'
Nor,' he added with difficulty, suppressing a titter,
"'any ladies either, except the young and the single.'
"'By Jove, she has taste!' exclaimed Henry Lynn. Miss Ingram rose solemnly.
"'I go first,' she said, in a tone which might have befitted the leader
of A Forlorn Hope, mounting a breach in the van of his men.
"'Oh, my best, oh, my dearest, pause, reflect!' was her mamma's cry.
But she swept past her in stately silence, passed through the door,
which Colonel Dent held open, and we heard her enter the library.
A comparative silence ensued. Lady Ingram thought it lecar to ring her
hands, which she did accordingly. Miss Mary declared she felt for her
part she never dared venture. Amy and Louisa Ashton tittered under their
breath, and looked a little frightened. The minutes passed very slowly.
Fifteen were counted before the library door again opened. Miss Ingram
returned to us through the arch. Would she laugh? Would she take it as a
joke? All eyes met her with a glance of eager curiosity, and she met all
eyes with one of rebuff and coldness. She looked neither flurried nor merry.
She walked stiffly to her seat, and took it in silence.
"'Well, Blanche?' said Lord Ingram.
"'What did she say, sister?' asked Mary.
"'What do you think? How do you feel? Is she a real fortune-teller?'
demanded the Mrs. Ashton.
"'Now, now, good people,' returned Miss Ingram.
"'Don't press upon me. Really, your organs of wonder and credulity are
easily excited. You seem, by the importance of you all—my good mamma
included—to ascribe to this matter, absolutely to believe that we have
a genuine witch in the house who is in close alliance with the old
gentleman. I have seen a gypsy vagabond, she has practised in hackneyed
fashion the science of palmistry, and told me what such people usually
tell. My whim is gratified, and now I think Mr. Ashton will do well to
put the hag in the stocks to-morrow morning, as he threatened.'
Miss Ingram took a book, lent back in her chair, and so declined further
conversation. I watched her for nearly half an hour. During all that time
she never turned a page, and her face grew momentarily darker, more
dissatisfied, and more sourly expressive of disappointment. She had
obviously not heard anything to her advantage, and it seemed to me from
her prolonged fit of gloom and taciturnity that she herself, notwithstanding
her professed indifference, attached undue importance to
had been made her. Meantime Mary Ingram, Amy, and Louisa Ashton declared
they dared not go alone, and yet they all wished to go. A negotiation
was opened through the medium of the Ambassador, Sam, and after much
pacing to and fro, till I think the said Sam's calves must have ached
with the exercise, permission was at last, with great difficulty,
extorted from the rigorous Sybil, for the three to wait upon her in a
Their visit was not so still as Miss Ingram's had been. We heard
hysterical giggling, and little shrieks proceeding from the library,
and at the end of about twenty minutes they burst the door open and
came running across the hall, as if they were half scared out of their
wits.
"'I am sure she is something not right,' they cried, one and all.
"'She told us such things. She knows all about us.' And they sank
breathless into the various seats the gentlemen hastened to bring
them. Pressed for further explanation, they declared she had told
them of things they had said and done when they were mere children,
described books and ornaments they had in their bidoires at home,
keepsakes that different relations had presented to them. They had
affirmed that she had even divined their thoughts, and had whispered
in the ear of each the name of the person she liked best in the world,
and informed them of what they wished for most. Here the gentlemen
interposed with earnest petitions to be further enlightened on these
two last-named points, but they got only blushes, ejaculations, tremors
and titters in return for their importunity. The matrons, meantime,
offered vinaigrettes and wielded fans, and again and again reiterated
the expression of their concern that their warning had not been taken
in time. And the elder gentlemen laughed, and the younger urged their
services on the agitated fair ones. In the midst of the tumult, and
while my eyes and ears were fully engaged in the scene before me, I
heard a hem close at my elbow. I turned, and saw Sam.
If you please, Miss, the gypsy declares that there is another young
single lady in the room who has not been to her yet, and she swears she
will not go till she has seen all. I thought it must be you. There is
no one else for it. What shall I tell her?
Oh, I will go by all means, I answered, and I was glad of the
unexpected opportunity to gratify my much excited curiosity. I slipped
out of the room, unobserved by any eye, for the company were gathered in
one mass about the trembling trio just returned, and I closed the door
quietly behind me.
If you like, Miss, said Sam, I'll wait in the hall for you, and if she
frightens you, just call and I'll come in. No, Sam, return to the
kitchen. I am not in the least afraid.
Nor was I, but I was a good deal interested and excited.
The library looked tranquil enough as I entered it, and the Sibyl, if Sibyl she
were, was seated snugly enough in an easy chair at the chimney corner. She had on a
red cloak and a black bonnet, or rather a broad brim gypsy hat tied down with a
striped handkerchief under her chin. An extinguished candle stood on the table.
She was bending over the fire and seemed reading in a little black book, like a
book by the light of the blaze. She muttered the words to herself as most old
women do while she read. She did not desist immediately on my entrance. It
appeared she wished to finish a paragraph. I stood on the rug and warmed
my hands, which were rather cold with sitting at a distance from the drawing
room fire. I felt now as composed as ever I did in my life. There was nothing
indeed in the gypsy's appearance to trouble one's calm. She shut her book and
slowly looked up. Her hat brim partially shaded her face, yet I could see as she
raised it that it was a strange one. It looked all brown and black. Elf-locks
bristled out from beneath a white band which passed under her chin and came
half over her cheeks, or rather jaws. Her eyes confronted me at once with a bold
and direct gaze.
Well, and you want your fortune told? She said in a voice as decided as her glance,
as harsh as her features. I don't care about it, mother. You may please
yourself, but I ought to warn you. I have no faith. It's like your impotence to say
so. I expect it of you. I heard it in your step as you crossed the threshold.
Did you? You have a quick ear. I have, and a quick eye, and a quick brain. You need
them all in your trade. I do, especially when I've customers like you to deal
with. Why don't you tremble? I'm not cold. Why don't you turn pale? I am not sick.
Why don't you consult my art? I'm not silly. The old crone knickered a laugh
under her bonnet and bandage. She then drew out a short black pipe, and lighting
it began to smoke. Having indulged a while in this sedative, she raised her
bent body, took the pipe from her lips, and while gazing steadily at the fire,
said very deliberately, You are cold, you are sick, and you are silly. Prove it, I
rejoined. I will, in a few words. You are cold because you are alone. No contact
strikes the fire from you that is in you. You are sick because the best of
things, the highest and sweetest given to man, keeps far away from you. You are
silly because you suffer as you may. You will not beckon it to approach, nor will
you stir one step to meet it where it waits you. She again put her short black
pipe to her lips, and renewed her smoking with vigor. You might say all that to
almost anyone who you knew lived as a solitary dependent in a great house. I
might say it to almost anyone, but would it be true of almost anyone? In my
circumstances? Yes, just so, in your circumstances, but find me another
precisely placed as you are. It would be easy to find you thousands. You could
scarcely find me one. If you knew it, you are peculiarly situated. Very near
happiness, yes, within reach of it. The materials are all prepared. There only
wants a movement to combine them. Chance laid them somewhat apart. Let them be
once approached, and bliss results. I don't understand enigmas. I never could
guess a riddle in my life. If you wish me to speak more plainly, show me your palm.
And I must cross it with silver, I suppose? To be sure. I gave her a shilling.
She put it into an old stocking-foot, which she took out of her pocket, and
having tied it round and returned it, she told me to hold out my hand. I did. She
arched her face to the palm, and poured over it without touching it. It is too
said she. I can make nothing of such a hand as that, almost without lines. Besides,
what is in a palm? Destiny is not written there. I believe you, said I. No, she
continued. It is in the face, on the forehead, about the eyes, in the lines of
the mouth. Kneel and lift up your head. Ah, now you are coming to reality, I said
as I obeyed her. I shall begin to put some faith in you presently. I knelt
within half a yard of her. She stirred the fire so that a ripple of light broke
from the disturbed coal. The glare, however, as she sat, only threw her face
into deeper shadow. Mine, it illumined. I wonder with what feelings you came to me
tonight, she said when she had examined me a while. I wonder what thoughts are
busy in your heart during all the hours you sit in yonder room with the fine
people flitting before you like shapes in a magic lantern, just as little
sympathetic communion passing between you and them as if they were really mere
shadows of human forms and not the actual substance. I feel tired
often, sleepy sometimes, but seldom sad. Then you have some secret hope to boy
you up and please you with whispers of the future? Not I. The utmost I hope is
to save enough money out of my earnings to set up a school some day in a little
house rented by myself. A mean nutriment for the spirit to exist on, and sitting
in that window seat. You see, I know your habits. You have learned them from the
servants. Ah, you think yourself sharp. Well, perhaps I have. To speak truth, I
have an acquaintance with one of them, Mrs. Poole. I started to my feet when I
heard the name. You have, have you? thought I. There is diablerie in the
Don't be alarmed, continued the strange being. She is a safe hand, is Mrs. Poole.
Close and quiet. Anyone may repose confidence in her. But as I was saying,
sitting in that window seat, do you think of nothing but your future school? Have
you no present interest in any of the company who occupy the sofas and chairs
before you? Is there not one face you study, one figure whose movements you
follow with at least curiosity? I like to observe all the faces and all the
figures. But you never single one from the rest? Or it may be two? I do
frequently, when the gestures or looks of a pair seem telling a tale. It amuses me
watch them. What tale do you like best to hear? Oh, I have not much choice. They
generally run on the same theme, courtship, and promise to end in the same
catastrophe, marriage. And do you like that monotonous theme? Positively I don't
care about it. It is nothing to me. Nothing to you? When lady, young and full
of life and health, charming with beauty and endowed with the gifts of rank and
fortune, sits and smiles in the eyes of a gentleman you... I what? You know. And
perhaps think well of. I don't know the gentleman here. I have scarcely
interchanged a syllable with one of them. And as to thinking well of them, I
respectable and stately and middle-aged, and others young, dashing, handsome and
lively. But certainly they are all at liberty to be the recipients of whose
smiles they please, without my feeling disposed to consider the transaction of
any moment to me. You don't know the gentleman here. You have not exchanged a
syllable with one of them. Will you say that of the master of the house? He is
not at home. A profound remark. A most ingenious quibble. He went to Millcote
this morning, and will be back here tonight or tomorrow. Does that
circumstance exclude him from the list of your acquaintance? Blot him, as it were,
out of existence? No, but I can scarcely see what Mr. Rochester has to do with
the theme you had introduced. I was talking of ladies smiling in the eyes of
the gentleman, and of late so many smiles have been shed into Mr. Rochester's
eyes that they overflow like two cups filled above the brim. Have you never
remarked that? Mr. Rochester has a right to enjoy the society of his guests.
No question about his right, but have you never observed that, of all the tales
told here about matrimony, Mr. Rochester has been favoured with the most lively
and the most continuous? The eagerness of a listener quickens the tongue of a
narrator. I said this rather to myself than to the gypsy, whose strange talk,
voice, manner, had by this time wrapped me in a kind of dream. One unexpected
sentence came from her lips after another, till I got involved in a web of
mystification, and wondered what unseen spirit had been sitting for weeks by my
watching its workings, and taking record of every pulse. Eagerness of a listener,
repeated she. Yes, Mr. Rochester has sat by the hour, his ear inclined to the
fascinating lips that took such delight in their task of communicating, and Mr.
Rochester was so willing to receive and looked so grateful for the pastime
given him. You have noticed this? Grateful? I cannot remember detecting gratitude in
his face. Detecting? You have analyzed then, and what did you detect if not gratitude?
I said nothing. You have seen love, have you not, and looking forward you have
and beheld his bride happy? Not exactly. Your witch's skill is rather at fault
sometimes. What the devil have you seen then? Never mind. I came here to inquire,
not to confess. Is it known that Mr. Rochester is to be married? Yes, and to
beautiful Miss Ingram. Shortly? Appearances would warrant that conclusion,
and no doubt, though with an audacity that once chastising out of you, you seem
to question it, they will be a superlatively happy pair. He must love such
a handsome, noble, witty, accomplished lady, and probably she loves him, or if
not his purse, at least his purse. I know she considers the Rochester estate
eligible to the last degree, though, God pardon me, I told her something on that
point about an hour ago which made her look wondrous grave. The corners of her
mouth fell half an inch. I would advise her black avest suitor to look out. If
another comes with a longer or clearer rent roll, he's dished. But mother, I did
not come to hear Mr. Rochester's fortune. I came to hear my own, and you have told
me nothing of it. Your fortune is yet doubtful. When I examined your face, one
trait contradicted another. Chance has meted you a measure of happiness, that I
knew it before I came here this evening. She has laid it carefully on one side
for you. I saw her do it. It depends on yourself to stretch out your hand and
take it up, but whether you will do so is the problem I study. Kneel again on the
rug. Don't keep me long. The fire scorches me. I knelt. She did not stoop
towards me, but only gazed leaning back in her chair. She began muttering. The
flame flickers in the eye. The eye shines like dew. It looks soft and full of
feeling. It smiles at my jargon. It is susceptible. Impression follows
impression through its clear sphere. Where it ceases to smile, it is sad. An
unconscious lassitude weighs on the lid. That signifies melancholy resulting from
loneliness. It turns from me. It will not suffer further scrutiny. It seems to deny
by a mocking glance the truth of the discoveries I have already made. To
disown the charge of both sensibility and chagrin, its pride and reserve only
opinion. The eye is favorable. As to the mouth, it delights at times in laughter.
It is disposed to impart all that the brain conceives. Though I dare say it would
be silent on much the heart experiences. Mobile and flexible, it was never
intended to be compressed in the eternal silence of solitude. It is a mouth which
should speak much and smile often and have human affection for its interlocutor.
That feature is too propitious. I see no enemy to a fortunate issue but in the
brow. And that brow professes to say I can live alone if self-respect and
circumstance require me so to do. I need not sell my soul to buy bliss. I have an
inward treasure born with me which can keep me alive if all extraneous delights
should be withheld or offered only at a price I cannot afford to give. The
forehead declares reason sits firm and holds the reins and she will not let the
feelings burst away and hurry her into wild chasms. The passions may rage
furiously like true heathens as they are and the desires may imagine all sorts of
but judgment shall still have the last word in every argument and the casting
vote in every decision. Strong wind, earthquake, shock and fire may pass by
but I shall follow the guiding of that still small voice which interprets the
of conscience.
Well said, forehead. Your declaration shall be respected. I have formed my plans,
right plans I deem them, and in them I have attended to the claims of conscience,
the counsels of reason. I know how soon youth would fade in the bloom parish,
if in the cup of bliss offered but one drag of shame or one flavor of remorse
were detected and I do not want sacrifice, sorrow, disillusion, such as not
my taste. I wish to foster not to blight, to earn gratitude not to ring tears of
blood, no nor of brine. My harvest must be in smiles, in endearments, in sweet.
That will do. I think I rave in a kind of exquisite delirium. I should wish now to
protract this moment ad infinitum but I dare not. So far I have governed myself
thoroughly. I have acted as I inwardly swore I would act but further might try
me beyond my strength. Rise, Miss Eyre, leave me, the play is played out.
Where was I? Did I wake or sleep? Had I been dreaming? Did I dream still? The old
woman's voice had changed, her accent, her gesture, and all were familiar to me
as my own face in a glass, as the speech of my own tongue. I got up but did not
go. I looked, I stirred the fire, and I looked again. But she drew her bonnet and
bandage closer about her face, and again beckoned me to depart. The flame
illuminated, her hand stretched out. Roused now and on the alert for
discoveries, I at once noticed that hand. It was no more the withered limb of an
eld than my own. It was a rounded supple member with smooth fingers
symmetrically turned, a broad ring flashed on the little finger, and stooping
forward, I looked at it and saw a gem I had seen a hundred times before. Again I
looked at the face, which was no longer turned from me. On the contrary, the
bonnet was doffed, the bandage displaced, the head advanced. Well, Jane, do you know
me? asked the familiar voice. Only take off the red cloak, sir, and then, but the
There then, off ye lendings. And Mr. Rochester stepped out of his disguise. Now, sir, what a strange idea.
But well carried out, eh? Don't you think so? With the ladies you must have managed well.
But not with you? You did not act the character of a gypsy with me. What
you have been trying to draw me out. Or in. You have been talking nonsense to make me
talk nonsense. It is scarcely fair, sir.
Do you forgive me, Jane?
I cannot tell till I have thought it all over. If, on reflection, I find I have fallen into
no great absurdity, I shall try to forgive you. But it was not right.
Oh, you have been very correct, very careful, very sensible.
I reflected, and thought on the whole I had. It was a comfort, but indeed, I had been on
my guard almost from the beginning of the interview. Something of masquerade I suspected.
I knew gypsies and fortune-tellers did not express themselves as this seeming old woman
had expressed herself. Besides, I had noted her feigned voice, her anxiety to conceal
her features. But my mind had been running on Grace Poole, that living enigma, that mystery
of mysteries as I considered her. I had never thought of Mr. Rochester.
Well, he said, what are you musing about? What does that grave smile signify?
Wonder and self-congratulations, sir. I have your permission to retire now, I suppose?
No, stay a moment, and tell me what the people in the drawing-room yonder are doing.
Discussing the gypsy, I dare say.
Sit down. Let me hear what they said about me.
I had better not stay long, sir. It must be near eleven o'clock. Oh, are you aware, Mr.
Rochester, that a stranger has arrived here since you left this morning?
A stranger? No. Who can it be? I expected no one. Is he gone?
No. He said he had known you long, and that he could take the liberty of installing himself
here till you returned.
The devil he did! Did he give his name?
His name is Mason, sir, and he comes from the West Indies. From Spanish town in Jamaica,
I think. Mr. Rochester was standing near me. He had taken my hand, as if to lead me to
a chair. As I spoke, he gave my wrist a convulsive grip. The smile on his lips froze. Apparently
a spasm caught his breath.
Mason, the West Indies, he said, in the tone one might fancy a speaking automaton to announce
its single words.
Mason, the West Indies, he reiterated, and he went over the syllables three times, growing
in the interval of speaking whiter than ashes. He hardly seemed to know what he was doing.
Do you feel ill, sir? I inquired.
Jane, I've got a blow. I've got a blow, Jane, he staggered. Oh, lean on me, sir.
Jane, you offered me your shoulder once before. Let me have it now.
Yes, sir, yes, and my arm. He sat down and made me sit beside him.
Holding my hand in both his own, he chafed it, gazing on me at the same time with the
most troubled and dreary look.
My little friend, said he, I wish I were in a quiet island with only you, and trouble
and danger and hideous recollections removed from me.
Can I help you, sir? I'd give my life to serve you.
Jane, if aid is wanted, I'll seek it at your hands. I promise you that.
Thank you, sir. Tell me what to do. I'll try at least to do it.
Fetch me now, Jane, a glass of wine from the dining-room. They will be at supper there,
and tell me if Mason is with them and what he is doing.
I went. I found all the party in the dining-room at supper, as Mr. Rochester had said. They
were not seated at table. The supper was arranged on the sideboard. Each had taken what he chose,
and then stood about here and there in groups, their plates and glasses in their hands.
Everyone seemed in high glee. Laughter and conversation were general and animated. Mr.
Mason stood near the fire, talking to Colonel and Mrs. Dent, and appeared as merry as any
of them.
I filled a wine-glass. I saw Miss Ingram watch me frowningly as I did so. She thought I was
taking a liberty, I dare say, and I returned to the library. Mr. Rochester's extreme pallor
had disappeared, and he looked once more firm and stern. He took the glass from my hand.
Here is to your health, minister and spirit, he said. He swallowed the contents and returned
it to me.
What are they doing, Jane?
Laughing and talking, sir.
They don't look grave and mysterious, as if they had heard something strange.
Not at all. They are full of jests and gaiety.
And Mason?
He was laughing, too.
If all these people came in a body and spat at me, what would you do, Jane?
Turn them out of the room, sir, if I could. He half-smiled.
But if I were to go to them, and they only looked at me coldly and whispered sneeringly
amongst each other, and then dropped off and left me one by one, what then, would you go
with them?
I rather think not, sir. I should have more pleasure in staying with you.
To comfort me?
Yes, sir, to comfort you, as well as I could.
And if they laid you under a ban for adhering to me?
I probably should know nothing about their ban, and if I did, I should care nothing about it.
Then you could dare censure for my sake.
I could dare it for the sake of any friend who deserved my adherence, as you I am sure do.
Go back now into the room, step quietly up to Mason, and whisper in his ear that Mr.
Rochester has come and wishes to see him. Show him in here, and then leave me.
Yes, sir.
I did his behest. The company all stared at me as I passed straight among them. I sought
Mr. Mason, delivered the message, and proceeded him from the room. I ushered him into the
library, and then I went upstairs.
At a late hour, after I had been in bed some time, I heard the visitors prepare to their
chambers. I distinguished Mr. Rochester's voice, and heard him say,
This way, Mason. This is your room.
He spoke cheerfully. The gay tones set my heart at ease. I was soon asleep.
XX.
I had forgotten to draw my curtain, which I usually did, and also to let down my window
blind.
The consequence was that when the moon, which was full and bright, for the night was fine,
came in her course to that space in the sky opposite my casement, and looked in at me
through the unveiled panes, her glorious gaze roused me.
Awakening in the dead of night, I opened my eyes on her disc, silver-white and crystal
clear.
It was beautiful, but too solemn.
I half rose and stretched my arm to draw the curtain.
Good God, what a cry!
The night, its silence, its rest, was rent entwined by a savage, a sharp, a shrilly sound
that ran from end to end of Thornfield Hall.
My pulse stopped, my heart stood still, my stretched arm was paralyzed.
The cry died and was not renewed.
Indeed, whatever being uttered that fearful shriek could not soon repeat it.
Not the widest-winged condor on the Andes could, twice in succession, send out such
a yell from the cloud shrouding his airy.
The thing delivering such utterance must rest ere it could repeat the effort.
It came out of the third story, for it passed overhead, and overhead, yes, in the room just
above my chamber ceiling, I now heard a struggle, a deadly one, it seemed, from the noise, and
a half-smothered voice shouted, help, help, help, three times, rapidly, will no one come,
it cried, and then, while the staggering and stamping went on wildly, I distinguished through
plank and plaster, Rochester, Rochester, for God's sake, come.
A chamber door opened, someone ran or rushed along the gallery, another step stamped on
above, and something fell, and there was silence.
I had put on some clothes, the horror shook all my limbs, I issued for my apartment.
The sleepers were all aroused, ejaculations, terrified murmurs sounded in every room, door
after door unclosed, one looked out and another looked out, the gallery filled.
Gentlemen and ladies alike had quitted their beds, and, oh, what is it?
Who is hurt?
What has happened?
Fetch a light.
Is it fire?
Are there robbers?
Where shall we run?
Was demanded confusedly on all hands, but for the moonlight, they would have been in
complete darkness, they ran to and fro, they crowded together, some sobbed, some stumbled,
the confusion was inextricable.
Where the devil is Rochester, cried Colonel Dent, I cannot find him in his bed.
Here, here, was shouted in return, be composed all of you, I'm coming, and the door at the
end of the gallery opened, and Mr. Rochester advanced with a candle, he had just descended
from the upper storey, one of the ladies ran to him directly, she seized his arm, it was
Miss Ingram.
What awful event has taken place, said she, speak, let us know the worst at once.
Don't pull me down or strangle me, he replied, for the Mrs. Eshton were clinging about him
now, and the two dowagers in vast white wrappers were bearing down on him like ships in full
sail.
All's right, all's right, he cried, it's a mere rehearsal of much ado about nothing,
ladies keep off, for I shall wax dangerous.
And dangerous he looked, his black eyes darted sparks, calming himself by an effort, he added,
a servant has had the nightmare, that is all, she is an excitable nervous person, she construed
her dream into an apparition or something of that sort, no doubt, and has taken a fit
with fright.
Now then, I must see you all back into your rooms, for till the house is settled she cannot
be looked after, gentlemen have the goodness to set the ladies the example, Miss Ingram,
I am sure you will not fail in evincing superiority to idle terrors, Amy and Louisa, return to
your nests like a pair of doves as you are, Madame, to the dowagers, you will take cold
to a dead certainty if you stay in this chill gallery any longer.
And so, by dint of alternate coaxing and commanding, he contrived to get them all once more enclosed
in their separate dormitories, I did not wait to be ordered back to mine, but retreated
unnoticed, as unnoticed I had left it.
Not however to go to bed, on the contrary, I began and dressed myself carefully, the
sounds I had heard after the scream, and the words that had been uttered, had probably
been heard only by me, for they had proceeded from the room above mine, but they assured
me that it was not a servant's dream which had thus struck horror through the house,
and that the explanation Mr. Rochester had given was merely an invention framed to pacify
his guests.
I dressed, then, to be ready for emergencies.
When dressed, I sat a long time by the window, looking out over the silent grounds and silvered
fields, and waiting for I knew not what.
It seemed to me that some event must follow the strange cry, struggle, and call.
No, stillness returned.
Each murmur and movement ceased gradually, and in about an hour Thornfield Hall was again
as hushed as a desert.
It seemed that sleep and night had resumed their empire.
Meantime, the moon declined.
She was about to set.
Not liking to sit in the cold and darkness, I thought I would lie down on my bed, dressed
as I was.
I left the window and moved with little noise across the carpet.
As I stooped to take off my shoes, a cautious hand tapped low at the door.
Am I wanted?
I asked.
Are you up?
Asked the voice I expected to hear.
Namely, my master's.
Yes, sir.
And dressed?
Yes.
Come out, then, quietly.
I obeyed.
Mr. Rochester stood in the gallery holding a light.
I want you.
He said.
Come this way, take your time, and make no noise.
My slippers were thin.
I could walk the matted floor as softly as a cat.
He glided up the gallery and up the stairs and stopped in the dark, low corridor of the
fateful third story.
I had followed and stood at his side.
Have you a sponge in your room?
He asked in a whisper.
Yes, sir.
And have you any salts, volatile salts?
Yes.
Go back and fetch both.
I returned, sought the sponge on the washstand, the salts in my drawer, and once more retraced
my steps.
He still waited.
He held a key in his hand.
Approaching one of the small black doors, he put it in the lock.
He paused and addressed me again.
You don't turn sick at the sight of blood?
I think I shall not.
I have never been tried yet.
I felt a thrill while I answered him, but no coldness and no faintness.
Just give me your hand, he said.
It will not do to risk a fainting fit.
I put my fingers into his.
Warm and steady was his remark.
He turned the key and opened the door.
I saw a room I remembered to have seen before, the day Mrs. Fairfax showed me over the house.
It was hung with tapestry, but the tapestry was now looped up in one part, and there was
a door apparent, which had then been concealed.
This door was open, a light shone out of the room within.
I heard thence a snarling, snatching sound, almost like a dog quarreling.
Mr. Rochester, putting down his candle, said to me, Wait a minute, and he went forward
to the inner apartment.
A shout of laughter greeted his entrance, noisy at first, and terminating in Grace
Poole's own goblin ha-ha.
She then was there.
He made some sort of arrangement without speaking, though I heard a low voice address him.
He came out and closed the door behind him.
Here, Jane, he said, and I walked around to the other side of a large bed, which with
its drawn curtains concealed a considerable portion of the chamber.
An easy chair was near the bedhead.
A man sat in it, dressed with the exception of his coat.
He was still.
His head leant back, his eyes were closed.
Mr. Rochester held a candle over him.
I recognized in his pale and seemingly lifeless face the stranger Mason.
I saw, too, that his linen on one side and one arm was almost soaked in blood.
Hold the candle, said Mr. Rochester, and I took it.
He fetched a basin of water from the washstand.
Hold that, said he.
I obeyed.
He took the sponge, dipped it in, and moistened the corpse-like face.
He asked for my smelling-bottle and applied it to the nostrils.
Mr. Mason shortly unclosed his eyes.
He groaned.
Mr. Rochester opened the shirt of the wounded man, whose arm and shoulder were bandaged.
He sponged away blood, trickling fast down.
Is there immediate danger, murmured Mr. Mason.
No, a mere scratch.
Don't be so overcome, man.
Bear up.
I'll fetch a surgeon for you now myself.
You'll be able to be removed by morning, I hope.
Jane, he continued.
Sir?
I shall have to leave you in this room with this gentleman for an hour, or perhaps two hours.
You will sponge the blood as I do when it returns.
If he feels faint, you will put the glass of water on that stand to his lips and your salts to his
nose. You will not speak to him on any pretext.
And Richard, it will be at the peril of your life if you speak to her.
Open your lips, agitate yourself, and I'll not answer for the consequences.
Again the poor man groaned. He looked as if he dared not move.
Fear, either of death or of something else, appeared almost to paralyze him.
Mr. Rochester put the now bloody sponge into my hand, and I proceeded to use it as he had done.
He watched me a second, then saying,
Remember, no conversation.
He left the room.
I experienced a strange feeling as the key graded in the lock,
and the sound of his retreating steps ceased to be heard.
Here, then, I was, in the third story,
fastened into one of its mystic cells.
Night around me, a pale and bloody spectacle under my eyes and hands,
a murderous hardly separated from me by a single door.
Yes, that was appalling.
The rest I could bear, but I shuddered at the thought of Grace Poole bursting out upon me.
I must keep to my post, however.
I must watch this ghastly countenance, these blue still lips forbidden to unclose,
these eyes now shut, now opening, now wandering through the room,
now fixing on me, and ever glazed with the dullness of horror.
I must dip my hand again and again in the basin of blood and water,
and wipe away the trickling gore.
I must see the light of the unsnuffed candle wane on my employment.
The shadows darken on the wrought antique tapestry round me,
and grow black under the hangings of the vast old bed,
and quiver strangely over the door of a great cabinet opposite,
whose front, divided into twelve panels, bore in grim design the heads of the twelve apostles,
each enclosed in its separate panel as in a frame.
While above them at the top rose an ebon crucifix and a dying Christ.
According, as the shifting obscurity and flickering gleam hovered here or glanced there,
it was now the bearded physician Luke that bent over his brow,
now St. John's long hair that waved, and anon the devilish face of Judas that grew out of the pain,
and seemed gathering life and threatening a revelation of the arch-traitor,
of Satan himself, in his subordinate's form.
Amidst all this, I had to listen as well as watch,
to listen for the movements of the wild beast, or the fiend in yonder side den.
But since Mr. Rochester's visit, it seemed spellbound.
All the night I heard but three sounds at three long intervals,
a step-creek, a momentary renewal of the snarling canine voice, and a deep human groan.
Then my own thoughts worried me. What crime was this that lived incarnate in this sequestered
mansion, and could neither be expelled nor subdued by the owner? What mystery that broke out now in
fire and now in blood at the deadliest hour of the night? What creature was it that masked in an
ordinary woman's face and shape uttered the voice now of a mocking demon and anon of a carrion-seeking
bird of prey? And this man I bent over, this commonplace, quiet stranger, how had he become
involved in the web of horror? And why had the fury flown at him? What made him seek this quarter
of the house at an untimely season, when he should have been asleep in bed? I had heard Mr. Rochester
assign him an apartment below. What brought him here? And why now was he so tame under the violence
or treachery done him? Why did he so quietly submit to the concealment Mr. Rochester enforced?
Why did Mr. Rochester enforce this concealment? His guest had been outraged. His own life,
on a former occasion, had been hideously plotted against, and both attempts he smothered in secrecy
and sank in oblivion. Lastly, I saw Mr. Mason was submissive to Mr. Rochester, and that the
over the inertness of the former. The few words which had passed between them assured me of this.
It was evident that in their former intercourse the passive disposition of the one had been
habitually influenced by the active energy of the other. Whence then had arisen Mr. Rochester's
dismay when he heard of Mr. Mason's arrival? Why had the mere name of this unresisting individual,
whom his word now suffice to control like a child, fallen on him a few hours since as a
thunderbolt might fall on an oak? Oh, I could not forget his look and his paleness when he whispered,
Jane, I have got a blow. I have got a blow, Jane. I could not forget how the arm had trembled which
he rested on my shoulder, and it was no light matter which could thus bow the resolute spirit
and thrill the vigorous frame of Fairfax Rochester.
When will he come? When will he come? I cried inwardly as the night lingered and lingered,
as my bleeding patient drooped, moaned, sickened, and neither day nor aid arrived. I had again and
again held the water to Mason's white lips, again and again offered him the stimulating salts.
My efforts seemed ineffectual. Either bodily or mental suffering, or loss of blood,
or all three combined were fast prostrating his strength. He moaned so and looked so weak,
wild, and lost. I feared he was dying, and I might not even speak to him.
The candle, wasted at last, went out. As it expired, I perceived streaks of gray
edging the window curtains. Dawn was then approaching. Presently, I heard pilot bark
far below, out of his distant kennel in the courtyard. Hope revived, nor was it unwarranted.
In five minutes more, the grating key, the yielding lock, warned me my watch was relieved.
It could not have lasted more than two hours. Many a week has seemed shorter.
Mr. Rochester entered, and with him the surgeon he had been to fetch.
Now, Carter, be on the alert, he said to this last. I give you but half an hour for dressing
the wound, fastening the bandages, getting the patient downstairs and all. But is he fit to move,
sir? No doubt of it. It is nothing serious. He is nervous. His spirits must be kept up.
Come, set to work. Mr. Rochester drew back the thick curtain,
drew up the holland blind, let in all the daylight he could, and I was surprised and
cheered to see how far dawn was advanced, what rosy streaks were beginning to brighten the east.
Then he approached Mason, whom the surgeon was already handling.
Now, my good fellow, how are you? He asked.
She's done for me, I fear, was the faint reply. Not a whit. Courage. This day,
fortnight, you'll hardly be a pin the worse of it. You've lost a little blood, that's all.
Carter, assure him there's no danger. I can do that conscientiously, said Carter,
who had now undone the bandages. Only I wish I could have got here sooner.
He would not have bled so much. But how is this? The flesh on the shoulder is torn as well as cut.
This wound was not done with a knife. There have been teeth here.
She bit me, he murmured. She worried me like a tigress when Rochester got the knife from her.
You should not have yielded. You should have grappled with her at once, said Mr. Rochester.
But under such circumstances, what could one do, returned Mason. Oh, it was frightful,
he added, shuddering. And I did not expect it. She looked so quiet at first.
I warned you, was his friend's answer. I said, be on your guard when you go near her. Besides,
you might have waited till tomorrow, and had me with you. It was mere folly to attempt the
interview tonight and alone. I thought I could have done some good. You thought, you thought.
Yes, it makes me impatient to hear you. But however, you have suffered,
and are likely to suffer enough for not taking my advice. So I'll say no more. Carter, hurry,
hurry. The sun will soon rise, and I must have him off.
Directly, sir. The shoulder is just bandaged. I must look to this other wound in the arm.
She has had her teeth here too, I think. She sucked the blood. She said she'd drain my heart,
said Mason. I saw Mr. Rochester shudder. A singularly marked expression of disgust,
horror, hatred warped his countenance almost to distortion. But he only said,
Come, be silent, Richard, and never mind her gibberish. Don't repeat it. I wish I could forget
it, was the answer. You will when you are out of the country, when you get back to Spanish Town.
You may think of her as dead and buried, or rather, you need not think of her at all.
Impossible to forget this night.
It is not impossible. Have some energy, man. You thought you were as dead as a herring two
hours since, and you are all alive and talking now. There. Carter has done with you, or nearly so.
I'll make you decent in a trice. Jane. He turned to me for the first time since his re-entrance.
Take this key. Go down to my bedroom and walk straight forward into my dressing room. Open
the top drawer of the wardrobe and take out a clean shirt and a neck handkerchief. Bring them
here and be nimble. I went, sought the repository he had mentioned, found the articles named,
and returned with them. Now, said he, go to the other side of the bed while I order his toilet.
But don't leave the room. You may be wanted again. I retired as directed.
Was anybody below stirring when you went down, Jane?
inquired Mr. Rochester presently. No, sir. All was very still.
We shall get you off cannily, Dick, and it will be better, both for your sake and for that of the
poor creature in Yonder. I have striven long to avoid exposure, and I should not like it to come
last. Here, Carter, help him on with his waistcoat. Where did you leave your furred cloak? You can't
travel a mile without that, I know, in this damned cold climate. In your room? Jane, run down to Mr.
Mason's room, the one next mine, and fetch a cloak you will see there. Again I ran, and again
returned, bearing an immense mantle lined and edged with fur. Now I have another errand for you,
said my untiring master. You must away to my room again. What a mercy you are shod with velvet,
Jane. A clod-hopping messenger would never do at this juncture. You must open the middle drawer of
my toilet table and take out a little file and a little glass you will find there. Quick.
I flew thither and back, bringing the desired vessels. That's well. Now, doctor, I shall take
liberty of administering a dose myself, on my own responsibility. I got this cordial at Rome
of an Italian charlatan, a fellow you would have kicked, Carter. It's not a thing to be used
indiscriminately, but it is good upon occasion. As now, for instance, Jane a little water.
He held out the tiny glass. I half filled it from the water bottle on the washstand.
That will do. Now wet the lip of the file. I did so. He measured twelve drops of the crimson liquid
and presented it to Mason. Drink, Richard. It will give you the heart you lack for an hour or so.
But will it hurt me? Is it inflammatory? Drink, drink, drink. Mr. Mason obeyed because it was
evidently useless to resist. He was dressed now. He still looked pale, but he was no longer gory
and sullied. Mr. Rochester let him sit three minutes after he had swallowed the liquid.
He then took his arm. Now, I am sure you can get on your feet, he said. Try. The patient rose.
Carter, take him under the other shoulder. Be of good cheer, Richard. Step out. That's it.
I do feel better, remarked Mr. Mason. I'm sure you do. Now, Jane,
trip on before us away to the back stairs. Unbolt the side passage door and tell the
driver of the post-chase you will see in the yard, or just outside, for I told him not to drive his
rattling wheels over the pavement, to be ready, we are coming, and, Jane, if anyone is about,
come to the foot of the stairs and hem. It was by this time half past five,
and the sun was on the point of rising, but I found the kitchen still dark and silent.
The side passage door was fastened. I opened it with as little noise as possible. All the yard
was quiet, but the gates stood wide open, and there was a post-chase with horses ready harnessed
and drivers seated on the box stationed outside. I approached him and said the gentlemen were coming.
He nodded. Then I looked carefully round and listened. The stillness of early morning slumbered
everywhere. The curtains were yet drawn over the servants' chamber windows. Little birds were
just twittering in the blossom-blanched orchard trees, whose boughs drooped like white garland
over the wall enclosing one side of the yard. The carriage horses stamped from time to time
in their closed stables. All else was still. The gentlemen now appeared. Mason, supported by
Mr. Rochester and the surgeon, seemed to walk with tolerable ease. They assisted him into the chase.
Carter followed.
Take care of him, said Mr. Rochester to the latter, and keep him at your house till he is quite well.
I shall ride over in a day or two to see how he gets on. Richard, how is it with you?
The fresh air revives me, Fairfax.
Leave the window open on his side, Carter. There is no wind. Goodbye, Dick.
Fairfax.
Well, what is it?
Let her be taken care of. Let her be treated as tenderly as may be. Let her...
He stopped and burst into tears.
I do my best, and have done it and will do it, was the answer. He shut up the chase door
and the vehicle drove away.
Yet would to God there was an end of all this, added Mr. Rochester as he closed and barred the
yard gates. This done, he moved with slow step and abstracted air towards a door in the wall
bordering the orchard. I, supposing he had done with me, prepared to return to the house.
Again, however, I heard him call Jane. He had opened the portal and stood at it, waiting for me.
Come where there is some freshness for a few moments, he said.
That house is a mere dungeon. Don't you feel it so?
It seems to me a splendid mansion, sir.
The glamour of inexperience is over your eyes, he answered.
And you see it through a charmed medium. You cannot discern that the gilding is
slime and the silk drapery's cobwebs, that the marble is sordid slate and the polished wood
merely refuse chips and scaly bark. Now here, he pointed to the leafy enclosure we had entered,
is all real, sweet and pure. He strayed down a walk, edged with box, with apple trees,
pear trees and cherry trees on one side, and a border on the other full of all sorts of
old-fashioned flowers, stalks, sweet Williams, primroses, pansies, mingled with southern wood,
sweet briar, and fragrant herbs. They were fresh now, as a succession of April showers and gleams
followed by a lovely spring morning could make them. The sun was just entering the dappled east,
and his light illumined the wreathed and dewy orchard trees that shone down the quiet walks
under them. Jane, will you have a flower? He gathered a half-blown rose, the first on the
bush, and offered it to me. Thank you, sir. And do you like this sunrise, Jane, that sky with
high and light clouds which are sure to melt away as the day waxes warm, this placid and balmy
atmosphere? I do very much. You have passed a strange night, Jane. Yes, sir. And it has made
you look pale. Were you afraid when I left you alone with Mason? I was afraid of someone coming
out of the inner room. But I had fastened the door. I had the key in my pocket. I should have
been a careless shepherd if I had left a lamb, my pet lamb, so near a wolf's den, unguarded.
You were safe. Will Grace Poole live here still, sir?
Oh, yes. Don't trouble your head about her. Put the thing out of your thoughts.
Yet it seems to me your life is hardly secure while she stays. Never fear. I will take care
of myself. Is the danger you apprehended last night gone by now, sir? I cannot vouch for that
till Mason is out of England, nor even then. To live for me, Jane, is to stand on a crater crust
which may crack and spew fire any day. But Mr. Mason seems a man easily led. Your influence,
sir, is evidently potent with him. He will never set you at defiance or willfully injure you.
Oh, no. Mason will not defy me, nor, knowing it, will he hurt me. But unintentionally,
he might in a moment by one careless word deprive me, if not of life, yet forever of happiness.
Tell him to be cautious, sir. Let him know what you fear, and show him how to avert the danger.
He laughed sardonically, hastily took my hand, and as hastily threw it from him.
If I could do that, simpleton, where would the danger be? Annihilate it in a moment.
Ever since I have known Mason, I have only to say to him, do that, and the thing has been done.
But I cannot give him orders in this case. I cannot say beware of harming me, Richard,
for it is imperative that I should keep him ignorant that harm to me is possible.
Now you look puzzled, and I will puzzle you further. You are my little friend, are you not?
I like to serve you, sir, and to obey you in all that is right.
Precisely. I see you do. I see genuine contentment in your gait and mean,
your eye and face. When you are helping me and pleasing me, working for me, and with me,
in, as you characteristically say, all that is right. For if I bid you do what you thought
wrong, there would be no light-footed running, no neat-handed alacrity, no lively glance and
complexion. My friend would then turn to me, quiet and pale, and would say,
No, sir, that is impossible. I cannot do it, because it is wrong.
And would become immutable as a fixed star. Will you too have power over me, and may injure me?
Yet I dare not show you where I am vulnerable.
Less faithful and friendly as you are, you should transfix me at once.
If you have no more to fear from Mr. Mason than you have from me, sir, you are very safe.
God grant it may be so. Here, Jane, is an arbor. Sit down.
The arbor was an arch in the wall, lined with ivy. It contained a rustic seat.
Mr. Rochester took it, leaving room, however, for me, but I stood before him.
Sit, he said. The bench is long enough for two.
You don't hesitate to take a place at my side, do you? Is that wrong, Jane?
I answered him by assuming it. To refuse would, I felt, have been unwise.
Now, my little friend, while the sun drinks the dew, while all the flowers in this old garden
awake and expand, and the birds fetch their young ones breakfast out of the thorn field,
and the early bees do their first spell of work, I'll put a case to you,
which you must endeavor to suppose your own. But first, look at me, and tell me, are you at ease,
and not fearing that I err in detaining you, or that you err in staying?
No, sir, I am content.
Well then, Jane, call to aid your fancy. Suppose you were no longer a girl well reared and
imagine yourself in a remote foreign land. Conceive that you there committed a capital error,
no matter of what nature or from what motives, but one whose consequences must follow you
through life and taint all your existence. Mind, I don't say a crime. I am not speaking
of shedding of blood or any other guilty act which might make the perpetrator amenable to the law.
My word is error. The results of what you have done become in time to you utterly insupportable.
You take measures to obtain relief, unusual measures, but neither unlawful nor culpable.
Still, you are miserable, for hope has quitted you on the very confines of life.
Your sun at noon darkens in an eclipse, which you feel will not leave it till the time of setting.
Bitter and base associations have become the sole food of your memory.
You wander here and there, seeking rest in exile, happiness in pleasure. I mean in heartless,
sensual pleasure, such as dulls intellect and blights feeling. Heart weary and soul withered,
you come home after years of voluntary banishment. You make a new acquaintance,
how or where, no matter. You find in this stranger much of the good and bright qualities
which you have sought for twenty years and never before encountered.
And they are all fresh, healthy, without soil and without taint.
Such society revives, regenerates. You feel better days come back, higher wishes,
purer feelings. You desire to recommence your life, and spend what remains to you of days in
a way more worthy of an immortal being. To attain this end, are you justified in overleaping an
obstacle of custom, a mere conventional impediment which neither your conscience sanctifies nor your
judgment approves? He paused for an answer, and what was I to say? Oh, for some good spirit to
suggest a judicious and satisfactory response, vain aspiration. The west wind whispered in the
ivy round me, but no gentle aerial borrowed its breath as a medium of speech. The birds
sang in the treetops, but their song, however sweet, was inarticulate. Again Mr. Rochester
propounded his query. Is the wandering and sinful, but now rest-seeking and repentant man,
justified in daring the world's opinion in order to attach himself forever this gentle, gracious,
genial stranger, thereby securing his own peace of mind and regeneration of life?
Sir, I answered, a wanderer's repose or a sinner's reformation should never depend on a fellow
creature. Men and women die, philosophers falter in wisdom, and Christians in goodness.
If anyone you know has suffered and erred, let him look higher than his equals for strength
to amend and solace to heal. But the instrument, the instrument, God who does the work,
ordains the instrument. I have myself, I tell it you without parable, been a worldly, dissipated,
restless man, and I believe I have found the instrument for my cure and...
He paused. The birds went on caroling, the leaves lightly rustling. I almost wondered
they did not check their song and whispers to catch the suspended revelation, but they
would have had to wait many minutes, so long was the silence protracted. At last I looked
up at the tardy speaker. He was looking eagerly at me.
Little friend, said he in a quite changed tone, while his face changed too, losing all its
softness and gravity, and becoming harsh and sarcastic. You have noticed my tender penchant
for Miss Ingram. Don't you think if I married her she would regenerate me with a vengeance?
He got up instantly and went to the other end of the walk, and when he came back he was humming
a tune. Jane, said he stopping before me. You are quite pale with your vigils. Don't you
curse me for disturbing your rest? Curse you? No, sir. Shake hands in confirmation of the word.
What cold fingers! They were warmer last night when I touched them at the door of the mysterious
chamber. Jane, when will you watch with me again? Whenever I can be useful, sir.
For instance, the night before I am married? I am sure I shall not be able to sleep. Will you
promise to sit up with me, to bear me company? To you I can talk of my lovely one, for now you
have seen her and know her. Yes, sir. She is a rare one, is she not, Jane? Yes, sir. A strapper,
a real strapper, Jane, big brown and buxom with hair just as the ladies of Carthage must have had.
Bless me, there's dent and linen in the stables. Go, in by the shrubbery, through that wicket.
As I went one way, he went another, and I heard him in the yard, saying cheerfully,
Mason got the start of you all this morning. He was gone before sunrise.
I rose at four to see him off.
XXI.
Presentiments are strange things, and so are sympathies, and so are signs, and the three combined make one mystery to which humanity has not yet found the key.
I never laughed at presentiments in my life, because I have had strange ones of my own.
Sympathies, I believe, exist, for instance, between far-distant, long-absent, wholly estranged relatives asserting, notwithstanding their alienation, the unity of the source to which each traces his origin.
Whose workings baffle mortal comprehension, and signs, for aught we know, may be but the sympathies of nature with man.
When I was a little girl, only six years old, I one night heard Bessie Levin say to Martha Abbott that she had been dreaming about a little child, and that to dream of children was a sure sign of trouble, either to oneself or one's kin.
The saying might have worn out of my memory, had not a circumstance immediately followed which served indelibly to fix it there.
The next day Bessie was sent for home to the death-bed of her little sister.
Of late I had often recalled this saying and this incident, for during the past weeks scarcely a night had gone over my couch that had not brought with it a dream of an infant, which I sometimes hushed in my arms, sometimes dandled on my knee, sometimes watched playing with daisies on a lawn, or again dabbling its hands in running water.
It was a wailing child this night, and a laughing one the next.
Now it nestled close to me, and now it ran from me.
But whatever mood the apparition evinced, whatever aspect it wore, it failed not for seven successive nights to meet me the moment I entered the land of slumber.
I did not like this iteration of one idea, this strange recurrence of one image, and I grew nervous as bedtime approached and the hour of the vision drew near.
It was from companionship with this baby.
Phantom, I had been roused on that moonlight night when I heard the cry, and it was on the afternoon of the day following I was summoned downstairs by a message that someone wanted me in Mrs. Fairfax's room.
On repairing thither I found a man waiting for me, having the appearance of a gentleman servant.
He was dressed in deep mourning, and the hat he held in his hand was surrounded with a crepe band.
"'I dare say you hardly remember me, Miss,' he said, rising as I entered, "'but my name is Levin. I lived Coachman with Mrs. Reed when you were at Gateshead. Eight or nine years since, and I live there still.'
"'Oh, Robert, how do you do? I remember you very well. You used to give me a ride sometimes on Miss Georgiana's Bay Pony. And how is Bessie? You are married to Bessie?'
"'Yes, Miss. My wife is very hardy, thank you. She brought me another little one about two months since. We have three now, and both mother and child are thriving.'
"'And are the family well at the house, Robert?'
"'I am sorry I can't give you better news of them, Miss. They are very badly at present, in great trouble.'
"'I hope no one is dead,' I said, glancing at his black dress. He too looked down at the crepe round his hat and replied.'
"'Mr. John died yesterday, was a week, at his chambers in London.'
"'Mr. John?'
"'Yes.'
"'And how does his mother bear it?'
"'Why, you see, Miss Eyre, it is not a common mishap. His life has been very wild. These last three years he gave himself up to strange ways, and his death was shocking.'
"'I heard from Bessie he was not doing well.'
"'Doing well? He could not do worse. He ruined his health and his estate amongst the worst men and the worst women. He got into debt and into jail. His mother helped him out twice, but as soon as he was free he returned to his old companions and habits.
"'His head was not strong. The knaves he lived amongst fooled him beyond anything I ever heard. He came down to Gateshead about three weeks ago and wanted Misses to give up all to him. Misses refused. Her means have long been much reduced by his extravagance, so he went back again. And the next news was that he was dead. How he died God knows. They say he killed himself.'
"'I was silent. The things were frightful.' Robert Levin resumed.
"'Misses had been out of health herself for some time. She had got very stout, but was not strong with it, and the loss of money and fear of poverty were quite breaking her down.
"'The information about Mr. John's death and the manner of it came too suddenly. It brought on a stroke. She was three days without speaking. But last Tuesday she seemed rather better. She appeared as if she wanted to say something and kept making signs to my wife and mumbling.
"'It was only yesterday morning, however, that Bessie understood she was pronouncing your name. And at last she made out the words,
"'Bring Jane. Fetch Jane Eyre. I want to speak to her.'
"'Bessie is not sure whether she is in her right mind or means anything by the words. But she told Miss Reed and Miss Georgiana and advised them to send for you.'
"'The young ladies put it off at first. But their mother grew so restless and said, Jane, Jane, so many times that at last they consented. I left Gates' head yesterday. And if you can get ready, Miss, I should like to take you back with me early tomorrow morning.'
"'Yes, Robert. I shall be ready. It seems to me that I ought to go.'
"'I think so too, Miss. Bessie said she was sure you would not refuse. But I suppose you will have to ask leave before you can get off?'
"'Yes, and I will do it now.'
"'And having directed him to the servant's hall and recommended him to the care of John's wife and the attentions of John himself, I went in search of Mr. Rochester.
"'He was not in any of the lower rooms. He was not seen in the yard, the stables, or the grounds. I asked Mrs. Fairfax if she had seen him.
"'Yes, she believed he was playing billiards with Miss Ingram. To the billiard room I hastened. The click of balls and the hum of voices resounded thence.
"'Mr. Rochester, Miss Ingram, and two Mrs. Eshton and their admirers were all busied in the game. It required some courage to deserve so interesting a party.
"'My errand, however, was one I could not defer. So I approached the master, where he stood at Miss Ingram's side.
"'She turned as I drew near and looked at me haughtily. Her eyes seemed to demand,
"'What can this creeping creature want now?'
"'When I said in a low voice,
"'Mr. Rochester,'
"'she made a movement as if tempted to order me away. I remember her appearance at that moment. It was very graceful and very striking.
"'She wore a morning robe of sky-blue crepe. A gauzy azure scarf was twisted in her hair.
"'She had been all animation with the game, and irritated pride did not lower the expression of her haughty lineaments.
"'Does that person want you?'
"'She inquired of Mr. Rochester, and Mr. Rochester turned to see who the person was.
"'He made a curious grimace, one of his strange and equivocal demonstrations, threw down his cue, and followed me from the room.
"'Well, Jane,' he said, as he rested his back against the schoolroom door, which he had shut.
"'If you please, sir, I want leave of absence for a week or two.'
"'What to do? Where to go?'
"'To see a sick lady who was sent for me.'
"'What sick lady? Where does she live?'
"'At Gateshead, in Blankshire.'
"'Blankshire? That is a hundred miles off. Who may she be that sends for people to see her at that distance?'
"'Her name is Reed, sir, Mrs. Reed.'
"'Reed of Gateshead? There was a Reed of Gateshead, a magistrate.'
"'It is his widow, sir.'
"'And what have you to do with her? How do you know her?'
"'Mr. Reed was my uncle, my mother's brother.'
"'The deuce he was! You never told me that before. You always said you had no relations.'
"'None that would own me, sir. Mr. Reed is dead, and his wife cast me off.'
"'Why?'
"'Because I was poor and burdensome, and she disliked me.'
"'But Reed left children. You must have cousins. Sir George Lynn was talking of a Reed of Gateshead yesterday. Who?' he said.
"'Was one of the various rascals on town. And Ingram was mentioning a Georgiana Reed of the same place, who was much admired for her beauty a season or two ago in London.'
"'John Reed is dead too, sir. He ruined himself and half ruined his family, and is supposed to have committed suicide. The news so shocked his mother that it brought on an apoplectic attack.'
"'And what good can you do her? Nonsense, Jane. I would never think of running a hundred miles to see an old lady who will, perhaps, be dead before you reach her. Besides, you say she cast you off.'
"'Yes, sir, but that is long ago, and when her circumstances were very different. I could not be easy to neglect her wishes now.'
"'How long will you stay?'
"'As short a time as possible, sir.'
"'Promise me only to stay a week.'
"'I had better not pass my word. I might be obliged to break it.'
"'At all events, you will come back. You will not be induced under any pretext to take up a permanent residence with her.'
"'Oh no! I shall certainly return if all be well.'
"'And who goes with you? You don't travel a hundred miles alone.'
"'No, sir. She has sent her coachman.'
"'A person to be trusted?'
"'Yes, sir. He has lived ten years in the family.'
"'Mr. Rochester meditated.'
"'When do you wish to go?'
"'Early tomorrow morning, sir.'
"'Well, you must have some money. You can't travel without money, and I dare say you have not much. I have given you no salary yet.'
"'How much have you in the world, Jane?' he asked, smiling.
"'I drew out my purse. A meager thing it was.'
"'Five shillings, sir.'
"'He took the purse, poured the hoard into his palm, and chuckled over it, as if its scantiness amused him. Soon he produced his pocket-book.'
"'Here,' said he, offering me a note. It was fifty pounds, and he owed me but fifteen. I told him I had no change.'
"'I don't want change. You know that. Take your wages.'
"'I declined, accepting more than was my due.'
"'He scowled at first. Then, as if recollecting something, he said,
"'Right, right. Better not give you all now. You would perhaps stay away three months if you had fifty pounds. There are ten. Is it not plenty?'
"'Yes, sir. But now you owe me five.'
"'Come back for it, then. I am your banker for forty pounds.'
"'Mr. Rochester, I may as well mention another matter of business to you while I have the opportunity.'
"'Matter of business? I am curious to hear it.'
"'You have as good as informed me, sir, that you are going shortly to be married.'
"'Yes, what then?'
"'In that case, sir, Adele ought to go to school. I am sure you will perceive the necessity of it.'
"'To get her out of my bride's way? Who might otherwise walk over her rather too emphatically?
"'There is sense in the suggestion. Not a doubt of it. Adele, as you say, must go to school. And you, of course, must march straight to the devil.'
"'I hope not, sir. But I must seek another situation somewhere.'
"'In course,' he exclaimed, with a twang of voice and a distortion of features equally fantastic and ludicrous. He looked at me some minutes.'
"'And old Madame Reed, or the missus, her daughters, will be solicited by you to seek a place, I suppose?'
"'No, sir. I am not on such terms with my relatives as would justify me in asking favors of them. But I shall advertise.'
"'You shall walk up the pyramids of Egypt,' he growled.
"'At your peril you advertise. I wish I had only offered you a sovereign instead of ten pounds. Give me back nine pounds, Jane. I have a use for it.'
"'And so have I, sir,' I returned, putting my hands in my purse behind me. I could not spare the money on any account.'
"'Little niggered,' said he, refusing me a pecuniary request. Give me five pounds, Jane.'
"'Not five shilling, sir, nor five pence.'
"'Just let me look at the cash.'
"'No, sir. You are not to be trusted.'
"'Jane.'
"'Sir.'
"'Promise me one thing.'
"'I'll promise you anything, sir, that I think I am likely to perform.'
"'Not to advertise, and to trust this quest of a situation to me. I'll find you one in time.'
"'I shall be glad so to do, sir, if you, in your turn, will promise that I and Adèle shall be both safe out of the house before your bride enters it.'
"'Very well, very well. I'll pledge my word on it. You go tomorrow, then.'
"'Yes, sir. Early.'
"'Shall you come down to the drawing-room after dinner?'
"'No, sir. I must prepare for the journey.'
"'Then you and I must bid goodbye for a little while.'
"'I suppose so, sir.'
"'And how do people perform that ceremony of parting, Jane? Teach me. I'm not quite up to it.'
"'They say, farewell, or any other form they prefer. Then say it.'
"'Farewell, Mr. Rochester, for the present.'
"'What must I say?'
"'The same, if you like, sir.'
"'Farewell, Miss Eyre, for the present.'
"'Is that all?'
"'Yes.'
"'It seems stingy to my notions, and dry, and unfriendly. I should like something else, a little addition to the right.'
"'But no, that would not content me either. So you'll do no more than say farewell, Jane.'
"'It is enough, sir. As much goodwill may be conveyed in one hearty word as in many.'
"'Very likely. But it is blank and cool. Farewell.'
"'How long is he going to stand with his back against that door?' I asked myself. I went to commence my packing.'
"'The dinner bell rang, and suddenly away he bolted without another syllable. I saw him no more during the day, and was off before he had risen in the morning.
"'I reached the lodge at Gateshead about five o'clock in the afternoon of the first of May. I stepped in there before going up to the hall.
"'It was very clean and neat. The ornamental windows were hung with little white curtains. The floor was spotless. The grate and fire irons were burnished bright, and the fire burnt clear.'
"'Bessie sat on the hearth, nursing her last-born, and Robert and his sister played quietly in a corner.
"'Bless you! I knew you would come!' exclaimed Mrs. Levin as I entered.
"'Yes, Bessie,' said I, after I had kissed her, and I trust I am not too late. How is Mrs. Reed? Alive still, I hope?'
"'Yes, she is alive, and more sensible and collected than she was. The doctor says she may linger a week or two yet, but he hardly thinks she will finally recover.'
"'Has she mentioned me lately?'
"'She was talking of you only this morning and wishing you would come. But she is sleeping now, or was ten minutes ago when I was up at the house.
"'She generally lies in a kind of lethargy all the afternoon and wakes up about six or seven. Will you rest yourself here an hour, Miss, and then I will go up with you?'
"'Robert had entered, and Bessie laid her sleeping child in the cradle and went to welcome him.
"'Afterwards she insisted on my taking off my bonnet and having some tea, for she said I looked pale and tired.
"'I was glad to accept her hospitality, and I submitted to be relieved of my travelling garb just as passively as I used to let her undress me when a child.'
"'Old times crowded fast back on me as I watched her bustling about, setting out the tea tray with her best china, cutting bread and butter, toasting a tea cake, and, between wiles, giving little Robert or Jane an occasional tap or push, just as she used to give me in former days.
"'Bessie had retained her quick temper as well as her light foot and good looks.
"'Tea ready I was going to approach the table, but she desired me to sit still, quite in her old peremptory tones.
"'I must be served at the fireside,' she said, and she placed before me a little round stand with my cup and a plate of toast, absolutely as she used to accommodate me with some privately purloined dainty on a nursery chair, and I smiled and obeyed her as in bygone days.'
"'She wanted to know if I was happy at Thornfield Hall and what sort of a person the mistress was, and when I told her there was only a master, whether he was a nice gentleman and if I liked him.
"'I told her he was rather an ugly man, but quite a gentleman, and that he treated me kindly and I was content.
"'Then I went on to describe to her the gay company that had lately been staying at the house, and to these details Bessie listened with interest.
"'They were precisely of the kind she relished.
"'In such conversation an hour was soon gone.
"'Bessie restored to me my bonnet, etc., and, accompanied by her, I quitted the lodge for the hall.
"'It was also accompanied by her that I had, nearly nine years ago, walked down the path I was now ascending.
"'On a dark, misty, raw morning in January I had left a hostile roof with a desperate and embittered heart, a sense of outlawry and almost of reprobation, to seek the chilly harbourage of Lowood, that borne so far away and unexplored.
"'The same hostile roof now again rose before me.
"'My prospects were doubtful yet, and I had yet an aching heart.
"'I still felt as a wanderer on the face of the earth, but I experienced firmer trust in myself and my own powers, and lest withering dread of oppression.
"'The gaping wound of my wrongs, too, was now quite healed, and the flame of resentment extinguished.
"'You shall go into the breakfast room first,' said Bessie, as she proceeded me through the hall.
"'The young ladies will be there.'
"'In another moment I was within that apartment.
"'There was every article of furniture, looking just as it did on the morning I was first introduced to Mr. Brocklehurst.
"'The very rug he had stood upon still covered the hearth.
"'Glancing at the bookcases, I thought I could distinguish the two volumes of Buick's British Birds, occupying their old place on the third shelf, and Gulliver's Travels, and the Aramean Nights ranged just above.
"'The inanimate objects were not changed, but the living things had altered past recognition.
"'Two young ladies appeared before me, one very tall, almost as tall as Miss Ingram, very thin, too, with a sallow face and severe mien.
"'There was something acidic in her look, which was augmented by the extreme plainness of a straight skirted, black, stuffed dress, a starched linen collar, hair combed away from the temples, and the nun-like ornament of a string of ebony beads and a crucifix.
"'This, I felt sure, was Eliza, though I could trace little resemblance to her former self in that elongated and colorless visage.
"'The other was as certainly Georgiana, but not the Georgiana I remembered, the slim and fairy-like girl of eleven.
"'This was a full-blown, very plump damsel, fair as waxwork, with handsome and regular features, languishing blue eyes and ring-lidded yellow hair.
"'The hue of her dress was black, too, but its fashion was so different from her sister's, so much more flowing and becoming, it looked as stylish as the others looked puritanical.
"'In each of the sisters there was one trait of the mother, and only one. The thin and pallid elder daughter had her parents' cairn-gorm eye.
"'The blooming and luxuriant younger girl had the contour of chin and jaw, perhaps a little softened, but still imparting an indescribable hardness to the countenance otherwise so voluptuous in buxom.
"'Both ladies, as I advanced, rose to welcome me, and both addressed me by the name of Miss Eyre.
"'Eliza's greeting was delivered in a short, abrupt voice, without a smile, and then she sat down again, fixed her eyes on the fire, and seemed to forget me.
"'Georgiana added to her, How do you do?
"'Several common places about my journey, the weather, and so on, uttered in rather a drawling tone, and accompanied by sundry sign glances that measured me from head to foot, now traversing the folds of my drab merino police, and now lingering on the plain trimming of my cottage bonnet.
"'Young ladies have a remarkable way of letting you know that they think you a quiz, without actually saying the words.
"'A certain superciliousness of look, coolness of manner, nonchalance of tone, express fully their sentiments on the point, without committing them by any positive rudeness in word or deed.
"'A sneer, however, whether covert or open, had now no longer that power over me it once possessed.
"'As I sat between my cousins, I was surprised to find how easy I felt under the total neglect of the one and the semi-sarcastic attentions of the other.
"'Eliza did not mortify, nor Georgiana ruffle me.
"'The fact was I had other things to think about.
"'Within the last few months feelings had been stirred in me so much more potent than any they could raise.
"'Pains and pleasures so much more acute and exquisite had been excited than any it was in their power to inflict or bestow.
"'That their errors gave me no concern, either for good or bad.'
"'How is Mrs. Reed?' I asked soon, looking calmly at Georgiana, who thought it fit to bridle at the direct dress, as if it were an unexpected liberty.
"'Mrs. Reed? Ah, Mama, you mean? She is extremely poorly. I doubt if you can see her to-night.'
"'If,' said I, you would just step upstairs and tell her I am come. I should be much obliged to you.'
"'Georgiana almost started, and she opened her blue eyes wild and wide.
"'I know she had a particular wish to see me,' I added, and I would not defer attending to her desire longer than is absolutely necessary.
"'Mama dislikes being disturbed in an evening,' remarked Eliza.
"'I soon rose, quietly took off my bonnet and gloves uninvited, and said I would just step out to Bessie, who was, I dared say, in the kitchen,
"'and ask her to ascertain whether Mrs. Reed was disposed to receive me or not to-night.'
"'I went, and having found Bessie and dispatched her on my errand, I proceeded to take further measures.
"'It had heretofore been my habit always to shrink from arrogance. Received as I have been to-day, I should, a year ago, have resolved to quit Gateshead the very next morning.
"'Now it was disclosed to me all at once that that would be a foolish plan.
"'I had taken a journey of a hundred miles to see my aunt, and I must stay with her till she was better, or dead.
"'As to her daughter's pride or folly, I must put it on one side, make myself independent of it.
"'So I addressed the housekeeper, asked her to show me a room, told her I should probably be a visitor here for a week or two,
"'had my trunk conveyed to my chamber, and followed it thither myself. I met Bessie on the landing.
"'Mrs. is awake,' said she. I have told her you are here. Come and let us see if she will know you.'
"'I did not need to be guided to the well-known room to which I had so often been summoned for chastisement or reprimand in former days.
"'I hastened before Bessie. I softly opened the door. A shaded light stood on the table, for it was now getting dark.
"'There was the great four-post bed, with amber hangings as of old.
"'There the toilet table, the armchair, and the footstool, at which I had a hundred times been sentenced to kneel, to ask pardon for offences by me uncommitted.
"'I looked into a certain corner near, half expecting to see the slim outline of a once-dreaded switch which used to lurk there,
"'waiting to leap out imp-like and lace my quivering palm or shrinking neck.
"'I approached the bed. I opened the curtains and leant over the high-piled pillows.
"'Well did I remember Mrs. Reed's face, and I eagerly sought the familiar image.
"'It is a happy thing that time quells the longings of vengeance and hushes the promptings of rage and aversion.
"'I had left this woman in bitterness and hate, and I came back to her now with no other emotion than a sort of ruth for her great sufferings,
"'and a strong yearning to forget and forgive all injuries, to be reconciled and clasp hands in amity.
"'The well-known face was there, stern, relentless as ever.
"'There was that peculiar eye which nothing could melt, and the somewhat raised, imperious, despotic eyebrow.
"'How often had it lowered on me menace and hate?
"'And how the recollection of childhood's terrors and sorrows revived as I traced its harsh line now?
"'And yet I stooped down and kissed her. She looked at me.
"'Is this Jane Eyre?' she said.
"'Yes, Aunt Reed. How are you, dear aunt?'
"'I had once vowed that I would never call her aunt again.
"'I thought it no sin to forget and break that vow now.
"'My fingers had fastened on her hand which lay outside the sheet.
"'Had she pressed mine kindly, I should at that moment have experienced true pleasure.
"'But unimpressionable natures are not soon softened, nor are natural antipathies so readily eradicated.
"'Mrs. Reed took her hand away, and turning her face rather from me, she remarked that the night was warm.
"'Again she regarded me so idly, I felt at once that her opinion of me, her feeling towards me, was unchanged and unchangeable.
"'I knew by her stony eye, opaque to tenderness, indissoluble to tears, that she was resolved to consider me bad to the last,
"'because to believe me good would give her no generous pleasure, only a sense of mortification.
"'I felt pain, and then I felt Eyre, and then I felt a determination to subdue her,
"'to be her mistress in spite both of her nature and her will.
"'My tears had risen just as in childhood.
"'I ordered them back to their source.
"'I brought a chair to the bedhead, and sat down and leaned over the pillow.
"'You sent for me, I said, and I am here, and it is my intention to stay till I see how you get on.'
"'Oh, of course, you have seen my daughters.'
"'Yes.'
"'Well, you may tell them I wish you to stay till I can talk some things over with you I have in my mind.
"'Tonight it is too late, and I have a difficulty in recalling them.
"'But there was something I wished to say.
"'Let me see.'
"'The wandering look and changed utterance told what wreck had taken place in her once vigorous frame.
"'Turning restlessly, she drew the bedclothes round her.
"'My elbow, resting on a corner of the quilt, fixed it down.
"'She was at once irritated.
"'Sit up,' said she.
"'Don't annoy me with holding the clothes fast.
"'Are you Jane Eyre?'
"'I am Jane Eyre.'
"'I have had more trouble with that child than anyone would believe.
"'Such a burden to be left on my hands, and so much annoyance as she caused me daily and hourly
"'with her incomprehensible disposition and her sudden starts of temper and her continual, unnatural watchings of one's movements.
"'I declare she talked to me once like something mad, or like a fiend.
"'No child ever spoke or looked as she did.
"'I was glad to get her away from the house.
"'What did they do with her at Lowood?
"'The fever broke out there and many of the pupils died.
"'She, however, did not die.
"'But I said she did.
"'I wish she had died.'
"'A strange wish, Mrs. Reed.
"'Why do you hate her so?'
"'I had a dislike to her mother always, for she was my husband's only sister and a great favorite with him.
"'He opposed the family's disowning her when she made her low marriage,
"'and when news came of her death he wept like a simpleton.
"'He would send for the baby, though I entreated him rather to put it out to nurse,
"'and pay for its maintenance.
"'I hated it the first time I set my eyes on it.
"'A sickly whining, pining thing.
"'It would wail in its cradle all night long,
"'not screaming heartily like any other child, but whimpering and moaning.
"'Reed pitied it, and he used to nurse it and notice it as if it had been his own,
"'more indeed than he ever noticed his own at that age.
"'He would try to make my children friendly to the little beggar.
"'The darlings could not bear it, and he was angry with them when they showed their dislike.
"'In his last illness he had it brought continually to his bedside,
"'and but an hour before he died he bound me by vow to keep the creature.
"'I would as soon have been charged with a pauper brat out of a workhouse,
"'but he was weak, naturally weak.
"'John does not at all resemble his father, and I am glad of it.
"'John is like me and like my brothers.
"'He is quite a Gibson.
"'Oh, I wish he would cease tormenting me with letters for money.
"'I have no more money to give him. We are getting poor.
"'I must send away half the servants and shut up part of the house, or let it off.
"'I can never submit to do that. Yet how are we to get on?
"'Two thirds of my income goes in paying the interest of mortgages.
"'John gambles dreadfully and always loses, poor boy.
"'He is beset by sharpers.
"'John is sunk and degraded. His look is frightful.
"'I feel ashamed for him when I see him.'
"'She was getting much excited.
"'I think I had better leave her now,' said I to Bessie, who stood on the other side of the bed.
"'Perhaps you had, Miss, but she often talks in this way towards night.
"'In the morning she is calmer.'
"'I rose. Stop!' exclaimed Mrs. Reed.
"'There is another thing I wish to say.
"'He threatens me. He continually threatens me with his own death or mine.
"'And I dream sometimes that I see him laid out with a great wound in his throat,
"'or with a swollen and blackened face.
"'I am come to a strange pass. I have heavy troubles.
"'What is to be done? How is the money to be had?'
"'Bessie now endeavoured to persuade her to take a sedative draught.
"'She succeeded with difficulty.
"'Soon after Mrs. Reed grew more composed and sank into a dozing state.
"'I then left her.
"'More than ten days elapsed before I had again any conversation with her.
"'She continued either delirious or lethargic,
"'and the doctor forbade everything which could painfully excite her.
"'Mean time I got on as well as I could with Georgiana and Eliza.
"'They were very cold, indeed, at first.
"'Eliza would sit half the day sewing, reading, or writing,
"'and scarcely utter a word either to me or her sister.
"'Georgiana would chatter nonsense to her canary-bird by the hour
"'and take no notice of me.
"'But I was determined not to seem at a loss for occupation or amusement.
"'I had brought my drawing materials with me, and they served me for both.
"'Provided with a case of pencils and some sheets of paper,
"'I used to take a seat apart from them near the window
"'and busy myself in sketching fancy vignettes,
"'representing any scene that happened momentarily
"'to shape itself in the ever-shifting kaleidoscope of imagination.
"'A glimpse of sea between two rocks,
"'the rising moon, and a ship crossing its disk,
"'a group of reeds and water flags,
"'and an iad's head, crowned with lotus flowers rising out of them,
"'an elf sitting in a hedge sparrow's nest,
"'under a wreath of hawthorn bloom.
"'One morning I fell into sketching a face.
"'What sort of a face it was to be, I did not care or know.
"'I took a soft black pencil, gave it a broad point, and worked away.
"'Soon I had traced on the paper a broad and prominent forehead
"'and a square lower outline of visage.
"'That contour gave me pleasure.
"'My fingers proceeded actively to fill it with features.
"'Strongly marked horizontal eyebrows must be traced under that brow.
"'Then followed, to the left of the face,
"'naturally a well-defined nose with a straight ridge and full nostrils,
"'then a flexible-looking mouth, by no means narrow,
"'then a firm chin with a decided cleft down the middle of it.
"'Of course, some black whiskers were wanted
"'and some jetty hair tufted on the temples
"'and waved above the forehead.
"'Now for the eyes.
"'I had left them to the last
"'because they required the most careful working.
"'I drew them large.
"'I shaped them well.
"'The eyelashes I traced long and somber.
"'The irises, lustrous and large.
"'Good, but not quite the thing, I thought, as I surveyed the effect.
"'They want more force and spirit.
"'And I wrought the shades blacker
"'that the lights might flash more brilliantly.
"'A happy touch or two secured success.
"'There, I had a friend's face under my gaze.
"'And what did it signify that those young ladies turned their backs on me?
"'I looked at it.
"'I smiled at the speaking likeness.
"'I was absorbed and content.'
"'Is that a portrait of someone you know?'
"'asked Eliza, who had approached me unnoticed.
"'I responded that it was merely a fancy head
"'and hurried it beneath the other sheets.
"'Of course I lied.
"'It was, in fact, a very faithful representation of Mr. Rochester.
"'What was that to her, or to anyone but myself?'
"'Georgiana also advanced to look.
"'The other drawings pleased her much,
"'but she called that an ugly man.
"'They both seemed surprised at my skill.
"'I offered to sketch their portraits,
"'and each, in turn, sat for a pencil outline.
"'Then Georgiana produced her album.
"'I promised to contribute a watercolor drawing.
"'This put her at once into good humor.
"'Before we had been out two hours,
"'we were deep in confidential conversation.
"'She had favored me with a description of the brilliant winter
"'she had spent in London two seasons ago,
"'of the admiration she had there excited,
"'the attention she had received,
"'and I even got hints of the titled conquest she had made.
"'In the course of the afternoon and evening
"'these hints were enlarged on.
"'Various soft conversations were reported
"'and the style of fashionable life was that day improvised by her
"'for my benefit.
"'The communications were renewed from day to day.
"'They always ran on the same theme, herself, her loves and woes.
"'It was strange she never once inverted
"'either to her mother's illness or her brother's death
"'or the present gloomy state of the family's prospects.
"'Her mind seemed wholly taken up with reminiscences of past gaiety
"'and aspirations after dissipations to come.
"'She passed about five minutes each day
"'in her mother's sick room and no more.
"'Eliza still spoke little.
"'She had evidently no time to talk.
"'I never saw a busier person than she seemed to be.
"'Yet it was difficult to say what she did,
"'or rather to discover any results of her diligence.
"'She had an alarm to call her up early.
"'I know not how she occupied herself before breakfast,
"'but after that meal she divided her time into regular portions
"'three times a day she studied a little book,
"'which I found, on inspection, was a common prayer book.
"'I asked her once what was the great attraction of that volume
"'and she said, the rubric.
"'Three hours she gave to stitching, with gold thread,
"'the border of a square crimson cloth,
"'almost large enough for a carpet.
"'In answer to my inquiries after the use of this article
"'she informed me it was a covering for the altar of a new church
"'lately erected near Gates Head.
"'Two hours she devoted to her diary,
"'two to working by herself in the kitchen garden,
"'and one to the regulation of her accounts.
"'She seemed to want no company, no conversation.
"'I believed she was happy in her way.
"'This routine sufficed for her,
"'and nothing annoyed her so much as the occurrence of any incident
"'which forced her to vary its clockwork regularity.
"'She told me one evening,
"'when more disposed to be communicative than usual,
"'the ruin of the family had been a source of profound affliction to her.
"'But she had now, she said,
"'settled her mind and formed her resolution.
"'Her own fortune she had taken care to secure,
"'and when her mother died, and it was wholly improbable,
"'she tranquilly remarked that she should either recover or linger long,
"'she would execute a long, cherished project,
"'seek retirement where punctual habits would be permanently secured
"'from disturbance and place safe barriers between herself
"'and a frivolous world.
"'Of course not. Georgiana and she had nothing in common.
"'They never had had.
"'She would not be burdened with her society for any consideration.
"'Georgiana should take her own course,
"'and she, Eliza, would take hers.
"'Georgiana, when not unburdening her heart to me,
"'spent most of her time in lying on the sofa,
"'freading about the dullness of the house,
"'and wishing over and over again that her Aunt Gibson
"'would send her an invitation up to town.
"'It would be so much better,' said she,
"'if she could only get out of the way for a month or two
"'till all was over.
"'I did not ask what she meant by all being over,
"'but I suppose she referred to the expected decease of her mother
"'and the gloomy sequel of funeral rites.
"'Eliza generally took no more notice of her sister's indolence
"'and complaints than if no such murmuring, lounging object
"'had been before her.
"'One day, however, as she put away her account book
"'Georgiana, a more vain and absurd animal than you
"'was certainly never allowed to cummer the earth.
"'You had no right to be born, for you make no use of life.
"'Instead of living for, in, and with yourself
"'as a reasonable being ought,
"'you seek only to fasten your feebleness
"'on some other person's strength.
"'If no one can be found willing to unburden her or himself
"'with such a fat, weak, puffy, useless thing,
"'you cry out that you are ill-treated, neglected, miserable.
"'You must be a scene of continual change and excitement,
"'or else the world is a dungeon.
"'You must be admired, you must be courted,
"'you must be flattered.
"'You must have music, dancing, and society,
"'or you languish, you die away.
"'Have you no sense to devise a system which will make you
"'independent of all efforts and all wills but your own?
"'Take one day, share it into sections,
"'to each section apportion its task.
"'Include all.
"'Do each piece of business in its turn with method,
"'with rigid regularity.
"'The day will close almost before you are aware it has begun,
"'and you are indebted to no one for helping you
"'to get rid of one vacant moment.
"'You have had to seek no one's company, conversation,
"'sympathy, forbearance.
"'You have lived, in short, as an independent being ought to do.
"'Take this advice.
"'What else happen what may?
"'Neglect it, go on as heretofore craving, whining, and idling,
"'and suffer the results of your idiocy,
"'however bad and insuperable they may be.
"'I tell you this plainly, and listen.
"'For though I shall no more repeat what I am now about to say,
"'I shall steadily act on it.
"'After my mother's death I wash my hands of you.
"'From the day her coffin is carried to the vault in Gateshead Church
"'you and I will be as separate as if we had never known each other.
"'You need not think that because we chanced to be born
"'of the same parents I shall suffer you
"'to fasten me down by even the feeblest claim.
"'I can tell you this.
"'If the whole human race, ourselves accepted, were swept away
"'and we too stood alone on the earth,
"'I would leave you in the old world and betake myself to the new.'"
She closed her lips.
"'You might have spared yourself the trouble of delivering that tirade,'
"'answered Georgiana.
"'Because you are the most selfish, heartless creature in existence,
"'and I know your spiteful hatred towards me.
"'I have had a specimen of it before in the trick you played me
"'about Lord Edwin Veer.
"'You could not bear me to be raised above you, to have a title,
"'to be received into circles where you dare not show your face,
"'and so you acted the spy and informer
"'and ruined my prospects for ever.'
Georgiana took out her handkerchief and blew her nose for an hour afterwards.
Eliza sat cold, impassable, and assiduously industrious.
True, generous feeling is made small account of by some,
but here were two natures rendered,
the one intolerably acrid,
the other despicably savourless for the want of it.
Feeling without judgment is a washy-draught indeed,
but judgment untempered by feeling is too bitter
and husky a morsel for human deglutition.
It was a wet and windy afternoon.
Georgiana had fallen asleep on the sofa,
overprousal of a novel.
Eliza was gone to attend a saint's day service at the new church.
For, in matters of religion, she was a rigid formalist.
No weather ever prevented the punctual discharge
of what she considered her devotional duties.
Fair or foul, she went to church thrice every Sunday
and as often on weekdays as there were prayers.
I bethought myself to go upstairs
and see how the dying woman sped, who lay there almost unheated.
The very servants paid her but a remittent attention.
The hired nurse, being little looked after,
would slip out of the room whenever she could.
Bessie was faithful, but she had her own family to mind
and could only come occasionally to the hall.
I found the sick room unwatched.
As I had expected, no nurse was there.
The patient lay still and seemingly lethargic.
Her livid face sunk in the pillows.
She was lying in the grate.
I renewed the fuel, rearranged the bedclothes,
gazed awhile on her who could not now gaze on me,
and then I moved away to the window.
The rain beat strongly against the panes.
The wind blew tempestuously.
One lies there, I thought,
who will soon be beyond the war of earthly elements.
Whither will that spirit, now struggling to quit its material tenement,
flit when at length released?
In pondering the great mystery, I thought of Helen Burns,
recalled her dying words,
her faith, her doctrine of the equality of disembodied souls.
I was still listening and thought to her well-remembered tones,
still picturing her pale and spiritual aspect,
her wasted face and sublime gaze
as she lay on her placid deathbed
and whispered her longing to be restored to her divine father's bosom
when a feeble voice murmured from the couch behind.
Who is that?
I knew Mrs. Reed had not spoken for days.
Was she reviving?
I went up to her.
It is I, Aunt Reed.
Who, I? was her answer.
Who are you?
Looking at me was surprised and a sort of alarm, but still not wildly.
You are quite a stranger to me.
Where is Bessie?
She is at the lodge, Aunt.
She repeated, Who calls me Aunt?
You are not one of the Gipsons, and yet I know you.
That face, and the eyes and forehead
are quite familiar to me.
You are like, Why, you are like Jane Eyre.
I said nothing.
I was afraid of occasioning some shock by declaring my identity.
Yet, said she,
I am afraid it is a mistake. My thoughts deceive me.
I wished to see Jane Eyre,
where none exists. Besides, in eight years she must be so changed.
I now gently assured her
that I was the person she had supposed and desired me to be.
And seeing that I was understood,
and that her senses were quite collected,
I explained how Bessie had sent her husband to fetch me from Thornfield.
I am very ill, I know,
she said ere long.
I was trying to turn myself a few minutes since,
and I find I cannot move a limb.
It is my mind before I die.
What we think little of in health burdens us
at such an hour as the present is to me.
Is the nurse here, or is there no one in the room but you?
I assured her we were alone.
Well, I have twice done you a wrong which I regret now.
One was in breaking the promise which I gave my husband
to bring you up as my own child.
The other, she stopped.
After all, it is of no great importance perhaps,
and then I might get better,
and to humble myself so to her is painful.
She made an effort to alter her position, but failed.
Her face changed.
She seemed to experience some inward sensation,
the precursor perhaps of the last pang.
Well, I must get it over.
Eternity is before me.
I had better tell her.
Go to my dressing case, open it,
and take her directions.
Read the letter, she said.
It was short and thus conceived.
Madame, will you have the goodness to send me the address
of my niece Jane Eyre and to tell me how she is?
It is my intention to write shortly and desire her
to come to me at Madera.
Providence has blessed my endeavours to secure a competency,
and as I am unmarried and childless I wish to adopt her
during my life and bequeath her at my death
I am Madame, etc., etc.
John Eyre, Madera
It was dated three years back.
Why did I never hear of this? I asked.
Because I disliked you too fixedly and thoroughly
ever to lend a hand in lifting you to prosperity.
I could not forget your conduct to me, Jane,
the fury with which you once turned on me,
the tone in which you declared you abhorred me
the worst of anybody in the world,
and the very thought of me made you sick
and asserted that I had treated you with miserable cruelty.
I could not forget my own sensations
when you thus started up and poured out the venom of your mind.
I felt fear as if an animal that I had struck or pushed
had looked up at me with human eyes and cursed me in a man's voice.
Bring me some water. Oh, make haste.
Dear Mrs. Reed, said I,
as I offered her the draught she required.
Think no more of this. Let it pass away from your mind.
Forgive me for my passionate language.
I was a child then. Eight, nine years have passed since that day.
She heeded nothing of what I said,
but when she had tasted the water in drawn breath,
she went on thus.
I tell you I could not forget it,
and I took my revenge. For you to be adopted by your uncle
and placed in a state of ease and comfort was what I could not endure.
I wrote to him. I said I was sorry for his disappointment,
but Jane Eyre was dead.
I had a typhus fever at Lowood.
Now act as you please.
Write and contradict my assertion.
Expose my falsehood as soon as you like.
You were born, I think, to be my torment.
My last hour is wracked by the recollection of a deed
which, but for you, I should never have been tempted to commit.
If you could but be persuaded to think no more of an ant
and to regard me with kindness and forgiveness.
You have a very bad disposition
said she.
And one to this day I feel it impossible to understand
how for nine years you could be patient and quiescent under any treatment
and in the tenth break out all fire and violence
I could never comprehend.
My disposition is not so bad as you think.
I am passionate, but not vindictive.
Many a time as a little child
I should have been glad to love you if you would have let me
and I long earnestly to be reconciled to you now.
Kiss me, aunt.
I approached my cheek to her lips.
She would not touch it.
She said I oppressed her by leaning over the bed
and again demanded water.
As I laid her down, for I raised her and supported her on my arm
while she drank.
I covered her ice cold and clammy hand with mine.
The feeble fingers shrank for my touch.
The glazing eyes shunned my gaze.
I said at last,
You have my full and free forgiveness.
Ask now for God's and be at peace.
Poor suffering woman.
It was too late for her to make now the effort to change her habitual frame of mind.
Living she had ever hated me.
Dying she must hate me still.
The nurse now entered and Bessie followed.
I yet lingered half an hour longer
hoping to see some sign of amity but she gave none.
She was fast relapsing into stupor.
Nor did her mind again rally.
At twelve o'clock that night she died.
I was not present to close her eyes.
Nor were either of her daughters.
They came to tell us the next morning that all was over.
She was by that time laid out.
Eliza and I went to look at her.
Georgiana who had burst out into loud weeping said she dared not go.
There was stretched.
She was in an active frame.
Rigid and still.
Her eye of flint was covered with its cold lid.
Her brow and strong traits wore yet the impress of her inexorable soul.
A strange and solemn object was that corpse to me.
I gazed on it with gloom and pain.
Nothing soft.
Nothing sweet.
Nothing pitying or hopeful or subduing did it inspire.
Only a grating anguish for her woes.
And a somber, tearless dismay at the fearfulness of death in such a form.
Eliza surveyed her parent calmly.
After a silence of some minutes she observed.
With her constitution she should have lived to a good old age.
Her life was shortened by trouble.
And then a spasm constricted her mouth for an instant.
As it passed away she turned and left the room.
And so did I.
Neither of us had dropped a tear.
Mr. Rochester had given me but one week's leave of absence, yet a month elapsed before I quitted Gateshead.
I wished to leave immediately after the funeral, but Georgiana entreated me to stay till she could get off to London.
With her, she was now at last invited by her uncle, Mr. Gibson, who had come down to direct his sister's interment and settle family affairs.
Georgiana said she dreaded being left alone with Eliza.
From her, she got neither sympathy in her dejection, support in her fears, nor aid in her preparations.
So I bore with her feeble-minded wailings and selfish lamentations as well as I could, and did my best in sewing for her and packing her dresses.
It is true that while I worked, she would idle, and I thought to myself, if you and I were destined to live always together, cousin, we would commence matters on a different footing.
I should not settle tamely down into being the forbearing party.
I should assign you your share of labour and compel you to accomplish it, or else it should be left undone.
I should insist also on your keeping some of those drawling half-insincere complaints hushed in your own breast.
It is only because our connection happens to be very transitory and comes at a peculiarly mournful season that I consent thus to render it so patient and compliant on my part.
At last I saw Georgiana off, but now it was Eliza's turn to request me to stay another week.
Her plans required all her time and attention, she said.
She was about to depart for some unknown bourn, and all day long she stayed in her own room, her door bolted within, filling trunks, emptying drawers, burning papers, and holding no communication with anyone.
She wished me to look after the house, to see callers, and answer notes of condolence.
One morning she told me I was liberty, and she added,
I am obliged to you for your valuable services and discreet conduct.
There is some difference between living with such and one as you and with Georgiana.
You perform your own part in life and burden no one.
Tomorrow, she continued, I set out for the continent.
I shall take up my abode in a religious house near Lille, a nunnery, you would call it.
There I shall be quiet and unmolested.
I shall devote myself for a time to the examination of the Roman Catholic dogmas and to a careful study of the workings of their system.
If I find it to be, as I half suspect it is, the one best calculated to ensure the doing of all things, decently and in order, I shall embrace the tenets of Rome and probably take the veil.
I neither expressed surprise at this resolution nor attempted to dissuade her from it.
The vocation will fit you to a hair, I thought.
Much good may it do you.
When we parted she said,
Good-bye, cousin, Jane Eyre.
I wish you well.
You have some sense.
I then returned.
You are not without sense, cousin Eliza.
But what you have, I suppose, in another year will be walled up alive in a French convent.
However, it is not my business and so it suits you.
I don't much care.
You are in the right, said she, and with these words we each went our separate way.
As I shall not have occasion to refer either to her or her sister again, I may as well mention here that Georgiana made an advantageous match with a wealthy worn-out man of fashion.
And that Eliza actually took the veil and is at this day superior of the convent where she passed the period of her novitiate and which she endowed with her fortune.
How people feel when they are returning home from an absence, long or short, I did not know.
I had never experienced the sensation.
I had known what it was to come back to Gateshead when a child after a long walk, to be scolded for looking cold or gloomy, and later what it was to come back from church to Lowood to long for a plenteous meal and a good fire.
And to be unable to get either.
Neither of these returnings was very pleasant or desirable.
No magnet drew me to a given point, increasing in its strength, of attraction the nearer I came.
The return to Thornfield was yet to be tried.
My journey seemed tedious, very tedious.
Fifty miles one day, a night spent at an inn, fifty miles the next day.
During the first twelve hours I thought of Mrs. Reed in her last moments.
I saw her disfigured and discoloured face and heard her strangely altered voice.
I mused on the funeral day the coffin, the hearse, the black train of tenants and servants.
Few was the number of relatives.
The gaping vault, the silent church, the solemn service.
Then I thought of Elisa and Georgiana.
I beheld one the sign-assure of a ballroom, the other the inmate of a convent cell.
And I dwelt on and analysed their separate peculiarities of person and character.
The evening arrival at the great town of scattered these thoughts.
Night gave them quite another turn.
I lay down on my traveller's bed.
I left reminiscence for anticipation.
I was going back to Thornfield, but how long was I to stay there?
Not long of that I was sure.
I had heard from Mrs. Fairfax in the interim of my absence.
The party at the hall was dispersed.
Mr. Rochester had left for London three weeks ago, but he was then expected to return in a fortnight.
Mrs. Fairfax surmised that he was gone to make arrangements for his wedding,
as he had talked of purchasing a new carriage.
She said the idea of his marrying Miss Ingram still seemed strange to her,
but from what everybody said and from what she had herself seen
she could no longer doubt that the event would shortly take place.
You would be strangely incredulous if you did doubt it, was my mental comment.
I don't doubt it.
The question followed.
Where was I to go?
I dreamt of Miss Ingram all the night.
In a vivid morning dream I saw her closing the gates of Thornfield against me
and pointing me out another road,
and Mr. Rochester looked on with his arms folded,
smiling sardonically, as it seemed at both her and me.
I had not notified to Mrs. Fairfax the exact date of my return,
for I did not wish either car or carriage to meet me at Millcote.
I proposed to walk the distance quietly by myself,
and very quietly, after leaving my box in the Osler's care,
did I slip away from the George Inn about six o'clock of a June evening
and take the old road to Thornfield,
a road which lay chiefly through fields and was now a little frequented.
It was not a bright or splendid summer evening, though fair and soft.
The haymakers were at work all along the road,
and the sky, though far from cloudless, was such as promised well for the future.
Its blue, where blue was visible, was mild and settled,
and its cloud strata high and thin.
The west too was warm, no watery gleam chilled it.
It seemed as if there was a fire lit, an altar burning behind its screen of marbled vapour,
and out of the apertures shone a golden redness.
I felt glad as the road shortened before me,
so glad that I stopped once to ask myself what joy meant,
and to remind reason that it was not to my home I was going,
or to a permanent resting place,
or to a place where fond friends looked out for me and waited my arrival.
Mrs Fairfax will smile you a calm welcome, to be sure, said I,
and little Adele will clap her hands and jump to see you,
but you know very well you are thinking of another than they,
and that he is not thinking of you.
But what is so headstrong as youth?
What so blind as inexperience?
These affirmed that it was pleasure enough to have the privilege
of again looking on Mr Rochester, whether he looked on me or not.
And they added,
Heyson, Heyson, be with him while you may,
but a few more days or weeks at most, and you are parted from him for ever.
And then I strangled a new-born agony, a deformed thing,
which I could not persuade myself to own and rear, and ran on.
They are making hay too in thorn-field meadows,
or rather the labourers are just quitting their work
and returning home with their rakes on their shoulders.
Now at the hour I arrive.
I have but a field or two to traverse,
and then I shall cross the road and reach the gates.
How full the hedges are of roses!
But I have no time to gather any.
I want to be at the house.
I passed a tall briar shooting leafy and flowery branches across the path.
I see the narrow stile with stone steps,
and I see Mr Rochester sitting there,
a book and a pencil in his hand.
He is writing.
Well, he is not a ghost, yet every nerve I have is unstrung.
For a moment I am beyond my own mastery.
What does it mean?
I did not think I should tremble in this way when I saw him,
or lose my voice or the power of motion in his presence.
I will go back as soon as I can stir.
I need not make an absolute fool of myself.
I know another way to the house.
It does not signify if I knew twenty ways,
for he has seen me.
Hello, he cries, and he puts up his book and his pencil.
There you are. Come on, if you please.
I suppose I do come on.
Though in what fashion, I know not.
Being scarcely cognizant of my movements,
and solicitous only to appear calm,
and above all to control the working muscles of my face,
which I feel rebel insolently against my will,
and struggle to express what I have resolved to conceal.
But I have a veil. It is down.
I am a makeshift yet to behave with decent composure.
And this is Jane Eyre.
Are you coming from Millcote, and on foot?
Yes, just one of your tricks.
Not to send for a carriage,
and come clattering over street and road like a common mortal,
but to steal into the vicinage of your home along with twilight,
just as if you were a dream or a shade.
What deduce have you done with yourself this last month?
I have been with my answer, who is dead.
A true Janean reply.
Good angels be my guard.
She comes from the other world,
from the abode of people who are dead,
and tells me so when she meets me alone here in the gloaming.
If I dared, I'd touch you,
to see if you are substance or shadow, you elf.
But I'd as soon offer to take hold of a blue,
ignis fatuous light in a marsh.
Truant, Truant, he added,
when he had paused an instant.
Absent from me a whole month,
and forgetting me quite, I'll be sworn.
I knew there would be pleasure in meeting my master again,
even though I'd broken by the fear
that he was so soon to cease to be my master,
and by the knowledge that I was nothing to him.
But there was ever in Mr. Rochester,
so at least I thought,
such a wealth of the power of communicating happiness,
that taste but of the crumbs he scattered to stray,
and stranger birds like me was to feast genially.
His last words were balm.
They seemed to imply that he's imported something to him.
Whether I forgot him or not,
and he had spoken of Thornfield as my home,
would that it were my home.
He did not leave the stile,
and I hardly liked to ask to go by.
I inquired soon if he had not been to London.
Yes, I suppose you found that out by second sight.
Mrs. Fairfax told me in a letter.
And did she inform you what I went to do?
Oh, yes, sir. Everybody knew your errand.
You must see the carriage, Jane,
and tell me if you don't think it will suit Mrs. Rochester exactly,
and whether she won't look like Queen Bodicea
leaning back against those purple cushions.
I wish, Jane, I were a trifle better adapted
to match with her externally.
Tell me now, fairy as you are,
can't you give me a charm or a filter
or something of that sort to make me a handsome man?
It would be past the power of magic, sir,
and in thought I added,
a loving eye is all the charm needed
to such you are handsome enough.
Or rather, your sternness has a power beyond beauty.
Mr. Rochester had sometimes read my unspoken thoughts
with an acumen to me incomprehensible.
In the present instance he took no notice
of my abrupt focal response,
but he smiled at me with a certain smile he had of his own,
and which he used but on rare occasions.
He seemed to think it too good for common purposes.
It was the real sunshine of feeling.
He shed it over me now.
Pass, Janet, said he,
making room for me to cross the stile.
Go up home and stay your weary little wandering feet
at a friend's threshold.
All I had now to do was to obey him in silence.
No need for me to colloquise further.
I got over the stile without a word
and meant to leave him calmly.
An impulse held me fast.
A force turned me round, I said,
or something in me said for me,
and in spite of me.
Thank you, Mr. Rochester, for your great kindness.
I am strangely glad to get back again to you,
and wherever you are is my home, my only home.
I walked on so fast that even he could hardly have overtaken me
had he tried.
Little Adele was half wild with delight when she saw me.
Mrs. Fairfax received me with her usual plain friendliness.
Leah smiled, and even Sophie bid me bonsoir
with glee.
This was very pleasant.
There is no happiness like that of being loved by your fellow creatures
and feeling that your presence is an addition to their comfort.
I that evening shut my eyes resolutely against the future.
I stopped my cars against the voice that kept warning me
of near separation and coming grief.
When tea was over, and Mrs. Fairfax had taken her knitting,
and I had assumed a low seat near her,
and Adele kneeling on the carpet had nestled close up to me,
and a sense of mutual affection seemed to surround us
with a ring of golden peace,
I uttered a silent prayer that we might not be parted far or soon.
But when, as we thus sat, Mr. Rochester entered unannounced,
and looking at us, seemed to take pleasure in the spectacle of a group so amicable,
when he said he supposed the old lady was all right,
now that she had got her adopt daughter back again,
and added that he saw Adele was
prêt et croquer sa petite maman anglaise.
I half ventured to hope that he would even after his marriage
keep us together somewhere under the shelter of his protection,
and not quite exiled from the sunshine of his presence.
A fortnight of dubious calm succeeded my return to Thornfield Hall.
Nothing was said of the master's marriage,
and I saw no preparation going on for such an event.
Almost every day I asked Mrs. Fairfax if she had yet heard anything decided.
Her answer was always in the negative.
Once, she said, she had actually put the question to Mr. Rochester
as to when he was going to bring his bride home.
But he had answered her only by a joke and one of his queer looks,
and she could not tell what to make of him.
One thing specially surprised me, and that was
There were no journeyings backward and forward,
no visits to Ingram Park.
To be sure, it was twenty miles off on the borders of another county,
but what was that distance to an ardent lover?
To so practised and indefatigable a horseman as Mr. Rochester,
it would be but a morning's ride.
I began to cherish hopes I had no right to conceive,
that the match was broken off,
that rumour had been mistaken,
that one or both parties had changed their minds.
I used to look at my master's face to see if it was sad or fierce,
but I could not remember the time when it had been so uniformly clear of clouds or evil feelings.
If, in the moments I and my pupil spent with him,
I lacked spirits and sank into inevitable dejection,
he became even gay.
Neither had he called me more frequently to his presence,
never been kinder to me when there,
and alas, never had I loved him so well.
Thank you.
Splendid midsummer shone over England, skies so pure, suns so radiant, as were then seen
in long succession, seldom favour, even singly, our wave-girt land.
It was as if a band of Italian days had come from the south like a flock of glorious passenger
and lighted to rest them on the cliffs of Albion. The hay was all got in, the fields
round Thornfield were green and shorn, the roads white and baked, the trees were in their dark
prime, hedge and wood, full-leaved and deeply tinted, contrasted well with the sunny hue
of the cleared meadows between. On Midsummer Eve Adele, weary with gathering wild strawberries
in Hay Lane half the day, had gone to bed with the sun. I watched her drop asleep,
and when I left her I sought the garden. It was now the sweetest hour of the 24,
day its fervid fires had wasted, and dew fell cool on Panting Plain and Scorched Summit.
Where the sun had gone down in simple state, pure of the pomp of clouds spread a solemn
purple burning with the light of red jewel and furnace flame at one point. On one hill peak,
and extending high and wide, soft and still, softer over half heaven,
East had its own charm or fine deep blue, and its own modest gem a casino and solitary star.
Soon it would boast the moon, but she was yet beneath the horizon.
I walked a while on the pavement, but a subtle, well-known scent, that of a cigar,
stole from some window. I saw the library casement open at hand breadth. I knew I might be watched
thence, so I went part into the orchard. No nook in the grounds more sheltered and more Eden-like.
It was full of trees, it bloomed with flowers. A very high wall shut it out from the court
on one side. On the other a beach avenue screamed it from the lawn.
At the bottom was a sunk fence. Its sole separation from lonely fields a winding walk
bordered with laurels and terminating in a giant horse chestnut, circled at the base by a seat,
led down to the fence. Here one could wander unseen. While such honeydew fell,
such silence rained, such gloaming gathered, I felt as if I could haunt such shade for ever.
But in threading the flower and fruit parterres at the upper part of the enclosure,
enticed there by the light, the now rising moon cast on this more open quarter,
my step is stayed, not by sound, not by sight, but once more by a warning fragrance.
Sweet brier and southern wood, jasmine, pink and rose have long been yielding their evening
of incense. This new scent is neither of shrub nor flower. It is, I know it well. It is Mr.
Rochester's cigar. I look round and I listen. I see trees laden with ripening fruit. I hear a
gale warbling in a wood half a mile off. No moving form is visible. No coming step audible,
but that perfume increases. I must flee. I make for the wicket leading to the shrubbery,
and I see Mr. Rochester entering. I step aside into the ivy recess. He will not stay long.
He will soon return whence he came, and if I sit still he will never see me.
But no, even tide is as pleasant to him as to me, and this antique garden as attractive.
And he strolls on, now lifting the gooseberry tree branches to look at the fruit, large as plums,
with which they are laden, now taking a ripe cherry from the wall,
now stooping towards a knot of flowers either to inhale their fragrance or to admire the dew
beads on their petals. A great moth goes humming by me. It alights on a plant at Mr. Rochester's
thought I, and he is occupied too. Perhaps if I walk softly I can slip away unnoticed.
I trod on an edging of turf that the crackle of the pebbly gravel might not betray me.
He was standing among the beds at a yard or two distance from where I had to pass.
The moth apparently engaged him.
I shall get by very well, I meditated, as I crossed his shadow thrown long over the garden
by the moon, not yet risen high. He said quietly, without turning,
Jane, come and look at this fellow.
I had made no noise. He had not eyes behind. Could his shadow feel?
I started at first, and then I approached him.
Look at his wings, said he. He reminds me rather of a West Indian insect.
One does not often see so large and gay a night-rover in England.
There he has flown.
The moth roamed away. I was sheepishly retreating also, but Mr. Rochester followed me,
and when we reached the wicket, he said,
Turn back. On so lovely a night it is ashamed to sit in the house,
and surely no one can wish to go to bed while sunset is thus at meeting with moonrise.
It is one of my faults that though my tongue is sometimes prompt enough as an answer,
there are times when it sadly fails me in framing an excuse.
And always the lapse occurs at some crisis, when a facile word or plausible pretext is
specially wanting to get me out of painful embarrassment.
I did not like to walk at this hour alone with Mr. Rochester in the shadowy orchard,
but I could not find a reason to allege for leaving him.
I followed with lagging step, and thoughts busily bent on discovering a means of extrication.
But he himself looked so composed and so grave also, I became ashamed of feeling any confusion.
The evil, if evil existent or prospective there was, seemed to lie with me only.
His mind was unconscious and quiet.
Jane, he recommenced as we entered the laurel walk, and slowly strayed down in the direction
of the sunk fence and the horse chestnut. Thornfield is a pleasant place in summer,
is it not? Yes, sir. You must have become in some degree attached to the house,
you who have an eye for natural beauties and a good deal of the organ of attesiveness.
I am attached to it indeed. And though I don't comprehend how it is, I perceive you have acquired
a degree of regard for that foolish little child, Adele, too, and even for simple Dame Fairfax.
Yes, sir, in a different way I have an affection for both.
And would be sorry to part with them? Yes.
Pity, he said, and sighed and paused. It is always the way of events in this life,
he continued presently. No sooner have you got settled in a pleasant resting place than a voice
calls out to you to rise and move on, for the hour of repose is expired.
Must I move on, sir? I asked. Must I leave Thornfield?
I believe you must, Jane. I am sorry, Janet, but I believe indeed you must.
This was a blow, but I did not let it prostrate me.
Well, sir, I shall be ready when the order to march comes.
It is come now. I must give it tonight.
Then you are going to be married, sir. Exactly. Precisely. With your usual
acuteness you have hit the nail straight on the head. Soon, sir?
Very soon.
My, that is Miss Eyre, and you'll remember, Jane, the first time I, or Rumour, plainly intimated to
you that it was my intention to put my old bachelor's neck into the sacred noose, to enter into
the holier state of matrimony, to take Miss Ingram to my bosom. In short, she is an extensive
armful, but that's not to the point. One can't have too much of such a very excellent thing
as my beautiful blanche. Well, as I was saying, listen to me, Jane. You're not turning your head
to look after more moths, are you? That was only a lady-clop, child, flying away home.
I wish to remind you that it was you who first said to me, with that discretion I respect in you,
with that foresight, prudence and humility which befit your responsible and dependent position,
that in case I married Miss Ingram, both you and little Adèle had better trot forthwith.
I pass over the sort of slur conveyed in this suggestion on the character of my beloved.
Indeed, when you are far away, Janet, I'll try to forget it. I shall notice only its wisdom,
which is such that I have made it my law of action. Adèle must go to school,
and you, Miss Eyre, must get a new situation. Yes, sir, I will advertise immediately,
and meantime, I suppose, I was going to say, I suppose I may stay here till I find another
to betake myself to. But I stopped, feeling what not do to risk a long sentence,
for my voice was not quite under command.
In about a month I hope to be a bridegroom, continued Mr. Rochester, and in the interim
I shall myself look out for employment and an asylum for you. Thank you, sir. I am sorry to give.
No need to apologize. I consider that when a dependent does her duty as well as you have done
yours, she has a sort of claim upon her employer for any little assistance he can
conveniently render her. Indeed, I have already, through my future mother-in-law, heard of a place
that I think will suit. It is to undertake the education of the five daughters of Mr.
Mrs. Dionysius O'Gaul of Bitternut Lodge, Connaught, Ireland. You'll like Ireland, I think.
They're such warm-hearted people there, they say. It is a long way off, sir. No matter. A girl of
sense will not object to the voyage or the distance. Not the voyage, but the distance,
and then the sea is a barrier. From what, Jane? From England and from Thornfield and, well,
from you, sir. I said this almost involuntarily, and with as little sanction of free will,
my tears gushed out. I did not cry so as to be heard. However, I avoided sobbing.
The thought of Mrs. O'Gaul and Bitternut Lodge struck cold to my heart, and colder the thought
of all the brine and foam, destined as it seemed to rush between me and the master at whose side
I now walked, and coldest the remembrance of the wider ocean, wealth, caste, custom intervened
between me and what I naturally and inevitably loved. It is a long way, I again said. It is,
to be sure, and when you get to Bitternut Lodge, Conalt. Ireland. I shall never see you again,
Jane. That's morally certain. I never go over to Ireland, not having myself much of a fancy for
the country. We have been good friends, Jane, have we not? Yes, sir. And when friends are on
the eve of separation, they like to spend the little time that remains to them close to each
other. Come, we'll talk over the voyage, and the parting quietly half an hour or so,
while the stars enter into their shining life up in heaven yonder. Here is the chestnut tree,
here is the bench at its old roots. Come, we will sit there in peace tonight,
though we should never more be destined to sit there together. He seated me and himself.
It is a long way to Ireland, Janet, and I am sorry to send my little friend on such weary travels,
but if I can't do better, how is it to be helped? Are you anything akin to me,
you think, Jane? I could risk no sort of answer by this time. My heart was still.
Because, he said, I sometimes have a queer feeling with regard to you, especially when you are near
me, as now. It is as if I had a string somewhere under my left ribs, tightly and inextricably
knotted, to a similar string situated in the corresponding quarter of your little frame.
And if that boisterous channel and two hundred miles or so of land come broad between us,
I am afraid that chord of communion will be snapped. And then, I have a nervous notion
I should take to bleeding inwardly. As for you, you would forget me.
That I never should, sir. You know, impossible to proceed. Jane, do you hear that nightingale
singing in the wood? Listen. In listening, I sobbed convulsively, for I could repress
what I endured no longer. I was obliged to yield, and I was shaken from head to foot
with acute distress. When I did speak, it was only to express an impetuous wish
that I had never been born or never come to Thornfield. Because you are sorry to leave it?
The vehemence of emotion stirred by grief and love within me was claiming mastery,
and struggling for full sway, and asserting a right to predominate, to overcome,
to live, rise, and reign at last. Yes, and to speak.
I grieve to leave Thornfield. I love Thornfield. I love it. Because I have lived in it a full
and delightful life. Momentarily, at least. I have not been trampled on. I have not been petrified.
I have not been buried with inferior minds, and excluded from every glimpse of communion
with what is bright and energetic and high. I have talked face to face with what I reference,
with what I delight in, with an original, vigorous, and expanded mind. I have known you,
Mr. Rochester, and it strikes me with terror and anguish to feel I absolutely must be torn from you
forever. I see the necessity of departure, and it is like looking on the necessity of death.
Where do you see the necessity? he asked suddenly. Where? You, sir, have placed it before me.
In what shape? In the shape of Miss Ingram, a noble and beautiful woman, your bride.
My bride? What bride? I have no bride. But you will have.
Yes, I will. I will. He set his teeth. Then I must go. You have said it yourself.
No, you must stay. I swear it. And the oath shall be kept.
I tell you I must go, I retorted, roused, to something like passion. Do you think I can stay
to become nothing to you? Do you think I am an automaton, a machine without feelings,
and can bear to have my morsel of bread snatched from my lips, and my drop of living water dashed
from my cup? Do you think because I am poor, obscure, plain, and little, I am soulless and
heartless? You think wrong. I have as much soul as you, and full as much heart, and if God had
gifted me with some beauty and much wealth, I should have made it as hard for you to leave me
as it is now for me to leave you. I am not talking to you now through the medium of custom,
conventionalities, nor even of mortal flesh. It is my spirit that addresses your spirit,
just as if both had passed through the grave and we stood at God's feet equal, as we are.
As we are, repeated Mr. Rochester. So, he added, enclosing me in his arms, gathering me to his
breast, pressing his lips on my lips. So, Jane. Yes, so, sir, I rejoined. And yet not so, for you
are a married man, or as good as a married man, and wed to one inferior to you, to one with whom
you have no sympathy, whom I do not believe you truly love, for I have seen and heard you sneer at
her. I would scorn such a union. Therefore, I am better than you. Let me go. Where, Jane? To Ireland?
Yes, to Ireland. I have spoken my mind and can go anywhere now. Jane, be still. Don't struggle so,
like a wild, frantic bird that is rending its own plumage in its desperation. I am no bird.
And no net ensnares me. I am a free, human being, with an independent will,
which I now exert to leave you. Another effort set me at liberty, and I stood erect before him.
And your will shall decide your destiny, he said. I offer you my hand, my heart, and a share of all
possessions. You play a farce, which I merely laugh at. I ask you to pass through life at my side,
and to be my second self, and best earthly companion. For that fate, you have already
made your choice, and must abide by it. Jane, be still a few moments. You are overexcited.
I will be still, too. A waft of wind came sweeping down the laurel walk,
and trembled through the boughs of the chestnut. It wandered away, away, to an indefinite distance.
It died. The nightingale's song was then the only voice of the hour. In listening to it,
I again wept. Mr. Rochester sat quiet, looking at me gently and seriously.
Some time passed before he spoke. He at last said,
Come to my side, Jane, and let us explain and understand one another. I will never again come
to your side. I am torn away now, and cannot return. But Jane, I summon you as my wife.
It is you only I intend to marry. I was silent. I thought he mocked me.
Come, Jane, come hither. Your bride stands between us. He rose, and with a stride reached me.
My bride is here, he said again, drawing me to him, because my equal is here, and my likeness.
Jane, will you marry me? Still I did not answer, and still I writhed myself from his grasp.
For I was still incredulous. Do you doubt me, Jane? Entirely. You have no faith in me,
not a wit. Am I a liar in your eyes? he asked passionately.
Little skeptic, you shall be convinced. What love have I for Miss Ingram?
None, and that you know. What love has she for me? None, as I have taken pains to prove.
I caused a rumour to reach her that my fortune was not third of what was supposed, and after that,
I presented myself to see the result. It was coldness both from her and her mother.
I would not. I could not marry Miss Ingram. You, you strange, you almost unearthly thing,
I love as my own flesh. You, poor and obscure and small and plain as you are.
I entreat to accept me as a husband. What, me? I ejaculated. Being in this earnestness,
and especially in this incivility, to credit his sincerity. Me, who have not a friend in the world,
but you, if you are my friend. Not a shilling, but what you have given me.
You, Jane, I must have you for my own, entirely my own. Will you be mine? Say yes, quickly.
Mr. Rochester, let me look at your face. Turn to the moonlight. Why? Because I want to read your
countenance. Turn. There, you will find it scarcely more legible than a crumpled, scratched page.
Read on. Only make haste, for I suffer. His face was very much agitated and very much flushed,
and there were strong workings in the features and strange gleams in the eyes.
Oh, Jane, you torture me, he exclaimed, with that searching and yet faithful and generous look.
You torture me. How can I do that? If you are true and your offer real, my only feelings to you must
be gratitude and devotion. They cannot torture. Gratitude, he ejaculated and added wildly.
Jane, accept me quickly. Say, Edward, give me my name. Edward, I will marry you. Are you in
earnest? Do you truly love me? Do you sincerely wish me to be your wife? I do, and if an oath is
necessary to satisfy you, I swear it. Then, sir, I will marry you, Edward, my little wife.
Dear Edward, come to me. Come to me entirely now, said he, and added in his deepest tone,
speaking in my ear as his cheek was laid on mine. Make my happiness. I will make yours.
God pardon me, he subjoined ere long, and man-meddle not with me. I have her,
and will hold her. There is no one to meddle, sir. I have no kindred to interfere.
No, that is the best of it, he said, and if I had loved him less, I should have thought his
accent and look of exultation savage. But, sitting by him, roused from the nightmare of parting,
called the Paradise of Union, I thought only of the bliss given me to drink in so abundant a flow.
Again and again he said, Are you happy, Jane? And again and again I answered, Yes.
After which he murmured, It will atone. It will atone. Have I not found her friendless and cold
and comfortless? Will I not guard and cherish and solace her? Is there not love in my heart
and constancy in my resolves? It will expiate at God's tribunal. I know my Maker sanctioned
what I do. For the world's judgment I wash my hands thereof. For man's opinion I defy it.
But what had befallen the night? The moon was not yet set, and we were all in shadow.
I could scarcely see my Master's face, near as I was, and what ailed the chestnut tree?
It writhed and groaned, while wind roared in the laurel walk and came sweeping over us.
We must go in, said Mr. Rochester. The weather changes. I could have sat with thee till morning,
Jane. And so, thought I, could I with you? I have said so, perhaps. But a livid, vivid
spark leapt out of a cloud at which I was looking, and there was a crack, a crash,
and a close rattling peel, and I thought only of hiding my dazzled eyes against Mr. Rochester's
shoulder. The rain rushed down. He hurried me to the walk, through the grounds and into the house.
But we were quite wet before we could pass the threshold. He was taking off my shawl
in the hall, and shaking the water out of my loosened hair, when Mrs. Fairfax emerged from
her room. I did not observe her at first, nor did Mr. Rochester. The lamp was lit. The clock
was on the stroke of twelve.
Hasten to take off your wet things, said he, and before you go, good night, good night, my darling.
He kissed me repeatedly. When I looked up, on leaving his arms, there stood the widow, pale,
grave and amazed. I only smiled at her and ran upstairs.
Explanation will do for another time, thought I. Still, when I reached my chamber, I felt a
pang at the idea she should even temporarily misconstrue what she had seen. But joy soon
faced every other feeling, and loud as the wind blew, near and deep as the thunder crashed,
fierce and frequent as the lightning gleamed, cataract-like as the rain fell during a storm
of two hours' duration, I experienced no fear and little awe. Mr. Rochester came thrice to my door,
in the course of it, to ask if I was safe and tranquil. And that was comfort. That was strength
for anything. Before I left my bed in the morning, little Adele came running in to tell me that the
great horse Chestnut at the bottom of the orchard had been struck by lightning in the night,
and half of it split away.
As I rose and dressed, I thought over what had happened, and wondered if it were a dream.
I could not be certain of the reality till I had seen Mr. Rochester again, and heard him renew his words of love and promise.
While arranging my hair, I looked at my face in the glass, and felt that it was no longer plain.
There was hope in its aspect, and life in its colour, and my eyes seemed as if they had beheld the fount of fruition, and burrowed beams from the lustrous ribble.
I had often been unwilling to look at my master because I feared he would not be pleased at my look, but I was sure I might lift my face to his now, and not cool his affection by its expression.
I took a plain but clean and light summer dress from my drawer, and put it on.
It seemed no attire had ever so well become me, because none I had ever worn in so blissful a mood.
I was not surprised when I ran down the hall to see that a brilliant June morning had succeeded to the tempest of the night, and to feel, through the open glass door, the breathing of a fresh and fragrant breeze.
Nature must be gladsome when I was so happy.
A beggar woman and her little boy, paled, ragged objects both, were coming up the walk, and I ran down and gave them all the money I happened to have in my purse, some three or four shillings.
Good or bad, they must partake of my jubilee.
The rocks called, and blitherbirds sang, but nothing was so merry or so musical as my own rejoicing art.
Mrs. Fairfax surprised me by looking out the window with a sad countenance and saying gravely,
Miss Eyre, will you come to breakfast?
During the meal she was quiet and cool, but I could not undeceive her then.
I must wait for my master to give explanations, and so must she.
I ate what I could, and then I hastened upstairs.
I met a deal leaving the schoolroom.
Where are you going? It is time for lessons.
Mr. Rochester has sent me away to the nursery.
Where is he?
In there, pointing to the apartment she had left, and I went in, and there he stood.
Come and bid me good morning, said he.
I gladly advanced, and it was not merely a cold word now, or even a shake of the hand that I received, but an embrace and a kiss.
It seemed natural. It seemed genial to be so well-loved, so caressed by him.
Jane, you look blooming and smiling and pretty, said he.
Truly pretty this morning. Is this my pale little elf? Is this my mustard seed?
This little sunny-fade girl, with the dimpled cheek and rosy lips, the satin-smooth hazel hair, and the radiant hazel eyes?
I had green eyes, Rita, but you must excuse the mistake. For him they were new-dyed, I suppose.
It is Jane Erso.
Soon to be Jane Rochester, he added. In four weeks, Janet, not a day more. Do you hear that?
I did, and I could not quite comprehend it. It made me giddy.
The feeling the announcement sent through me was something stronger than it was consistent with joy, something that smoked and stunned.
It was, I think, almost fear.
You blushed, and now you're white, Jane. What is that for?
Because you gave me a new name.
Jane Rochester, and it seemed so strange.
Yes, Mrs. Rochester, said he. Young Mrs. Rochester. Fairfax Rochester's girl-bride.
It can never be, sir. It does not sound likely. Human beings never enjoy complete happiness in this world.
I was not born for a different destiny to the rest of my species.
To imagine such a lot befalling me is a fairy tale, a daydream, which I can and will realize. I shall begin today.
This morning I wrote to my banker in London to send me certain jewels he has in his keeping, heirlooms for the ladies of Thornfield.
In a day or two I hope to pour them into your lap, for every privilege, every attention shall be yours, that I would accord a peer's daughter if about to marry her.
Oh, sir, never rain jewels. I don't like to hear them spoken of.
Jewels for Jane Eyre sound unnatural and strange. I would rather not have them.
I will myself put the diamond chain around your neck and encircle it on your forehead, which it will become.
For nature, at least, has stemmed her patent of nobility under this brow, Jane, and I will clasp the bracelets on these fine wrists and load these fairy-like fingers with rings.
No, no, sir. Think of other subjects and speak of other things, and in another strain. Don't address me as if I were a beauty. I'm your plain quakerish governess.
You are a beauty in my eyes, and a beauty just after the desire of my heart. Delicate and aerial.
Punen insignificant, you mean? You're dreaming, sir, or you're sneering. For God's sake, don't be ironical.
I will make the world acknowledge your beauty too, he went on, while I really became uneasy at the strain he had adopted, because I felt he was either deluding himself or trying to delude me.
I will attire my Jane in satin and lace, and she shall have roses in her hair, and I will cover the head I love best with a priceless veil.
And then you wouldn't know me, sir, and I shall not be a Jane Eyre any longer, but an ape in a harlequin's jacket, a Jane Barrett plumes.
I would as soon see you, Mr. Rochester, tricked out on stage trappings as myself clad in a court lady's robe, and I don't call you handsome, sir, though I love you most dearly, far too dearly to flatter you. Don't flatter me.
He pursued this theme, however, without noticing my deprecation.
This very day I shall take you in the carriage to Millcote, and you must choose some dresses for yourself.
I told you we shall be married in four weeks. The wedding is to take place quietly in the church down below Yonder, and then I shall waft you away at once to town.
After a brief stay there, I shall bear my treasure to regions nearer the sun, to French vineyards and Italian plains, and she shall see whatever is famous in old story and in modern record.
She shall taste, too, of the life of cities, and she shall learn to value herself by just comparison with others.
Shall I travel? And with you, sir? You shall so join at Paris, Rome, and Naples, at Florence, Venice, and Vienna. All the ground I have wandered over shall be retrodden by you.
Wherever I stand my hoof, your sift foot shall step also. Ten years since I flew through Europe half mad with disgust, hate, and rage as my companions.
Now I shall revisit it healed and cleansed, with a very angel as my comforter.
I laughed at him as he said this. I am not an angel, I asserted, and I will not be one till I die. I shall be myself, Mr. Rochester.
Well, you must neither expect nor exact anything celestial of me, for you will not get it any more than I shall get it of you, which I do not at all anticipate.
What do you anticipate of me?
For a little while you will perhaps be as you are now, a very little while, but then you will turn cool, and then you will be capricotious, and then you will be stern, and I shall have much ado to please you.
But when you get well used to me, you will perhaps like me again. Like me, I say, not love me. I suppose your love will ever risk in six months or less.
I have observed in books written by men, that period assigned as the farthest to which a husband's ardour extends. Yet, after all, as a friend and companion, I hope never to become quite distasteful to my dear master.
Distasteful? And like you again? I think I shall like you again, and yet again, and I will make you confess I do not only like, but love you with truth, feather, and constancy.
Yet you are not capricotious, sir?
To women who please me only by their faces, I am the very devil when I find out they have neither souls nor hearts, when they open to me a perspective of flatness, triviality, and perhaps imbecility, coarseness, and ill temper.
But to the clear-eyed and eloquent tongue, to the soul made of fire, and the character in the bends but does not break, at once supple and stable, tractable and consistent, I am ever tender and true.
Had you ever experienced such a character, sir? Did you ever love such a one?
I love it now. But before me, if I indeed, in any respect, come up to your difficult standard?
I never met your likeness, Jane. You pleased me, and you master me. You seem to submit, and I like the sense of fliancy you impart.
And while I am twining the soft silken skein around my finger, it sends a thrill up my arm to my heart. I am influenced, conquered, and the influence is sweeter than I can express, and the conquest I undergo has a victory beyond any triumph I can win.
Why do you smile, Jane? What does that inexplicable, that uncanny turn of the countenance mean?
I was thinking, sir—you will excuse the idea, it was involuntary—I was thinking of Hercules and Samson with their charmers.
You were, you little elfish! Hush, sir! You don't talk very wisely just now, any more than those gentlemen acted very wisely.
However, had they been married, they would no doubt by their severity as husbands have made up for their softness as suitors. And so will you, I fear.
I wonder how you will answer me a year hence, should I ask a favour that does not suit your convenience or pleasure to grant.
Ask me something now, Jane, the least thing, I desire to be entreated. Indeed I will, sir, I have my petition already.
Speak, but if you look up and smile with that countenance, I shall swear concession before I know to what, and that will make a fool of me.
Not at all, sir. I ask only this. Don't send for the jewels, and don't crown me with roses. You might as well put a board of gold lace around that plain pocket handkerchief you have there.
I might as well guilt-refined gold. I know it. Your request is granted, then, for the time. I will remand the order I dispatched to my banker.
But you have not yet asked for anything. You have prayed a gift to be withdrawn. Try again.
Well then, sir, have the goodness to gratify my curiosity, which is much piqued on one point.
He looked disturbed.
What, what? he said hastily. Curiosity is a dangerous petition. It is well I have not taken a vow to accord every request.
But there can be no danger in complying with this, sir.
Utter it, Jane, but I wish that instead of a mere enquiry into perhaps a secret, it was a wish for half my estate.
Now, King Ahasuerus, what do I want with half your estate? Do you think I am a Jew, Yuzuru, seeking good investment in land?
I would much rather have all your confidence. You will not exclude me from your confidence if you admit me to your heart.
You are welcome to all my confidence that it is worth having, Jane. But for God's sake, don't desire a useless burden. Don't long for poison. Don't turn out a downright eave on my hands.
Why not, sir? You have just been telling me how much you would like to be conquered and how pleasant over persuasion is to you.
Don't you think I had better take advantage of the confession and begin in coax and entreat, even cry and be salty if necessary, for the sake of a mere essay of my power?
I dare you to any such experiment. Encroach, presume, and the game is up.
Is it, sir? You soon gave in. How stern you look now. Your eyebrows have become as thick as my finger, and your forehead resembles what in some astonishing poetry I once saw styled a blue-piled thunderloft.
That will be your married look, sir, I suppose. If that be your married look, I, as a Christian, will soon give up the notion of consulting with the mere spirit of Salamander.
But what had you to ask, thing? Out with it.
There, you are less than civil now, and I like rudeness a great deal better than flattery. I'd rather be a thing than an angel.
This is what I have to ask. Why did you take such pains to make me believe you wished to marry Miss Ingram?
Is that all? Thank God it is no worse. And now he unlit his black brows, looked down, smiling at me, and stroked my hair, as if well pleased at seeing a danger averted.
I think I may confess, he continued, even although I should make you a little indignant, Jane, and I've seen what a fire spirit you can be when you're indignant.
You glowed in the cool moonlight last night when you mutinied against fate and claimed your rank as my equal. Janet, by the by, it was you who made me the offer.
Of course I did. But the point of you, please, sir. Miss Ingram?
Well, I feigned courtship of Miss Ingram, because I wished to render you as madly in love with me as I was with you, and I knew jealousy would be the best ally I could call for in the furtherance of that end.
Excellent. Now you're small. Not one whit bigger than the end of my little finger. It was a burning shame and a scandalous disgrace to act in that way. Did you think nothing of Miss Ingram's feelings, sir?
Her feelings are concentrated in one, pride, and that needs humbling. Were you jealous, Jane? Never mind, Mr. Rochester. It is in no way interesting to you to know that.
Answer me truly once more. Do you think Miss Ingram will not suffer from your dishonest coquetry? Won't she feel forsaken and deserted?
Impossible. When you told me how she, on the contrary, deserted me, the idea of my insolvency cooled, or rather extinguished, her flame in a moment.
You have a curious designing mind, Mr. Rochester. I'm afraid your principles at some points are eccentric.
My principles were never trained, Jane. They may have grown a little awry for lack of attention.
Once again, seriously, may I enjoy that great good that has been vouchsafed to me without fearing that anyone else is suffering the bitter pain I myself felt a little while ago?
That you may, my good little girl. There is not another being in the world that has the same pure love for me as yourself. I lay that pleasant mention to my soul, Jane. I believe in your affection.
I turned my lips to the hand that lay on my shoulder. I loved him very much. More than I could trust myself to say. More than words had power to express.
Ask something more, he said presently. It is my delight to be entreated and to yield. I was again ready with my request.
Communicate your intentions to Mrs. Fairfax, sir. She saw me with you last night in the hall, and she was shocked. Give her some explanation before I see her again. It pains me to be misjudged by so good a woman.
Go to your room and put on your bonnet, he replied. I mean you to accompany me to Millcote this morning, and while you prepare for the drive, I will enlighten the old lady's understanding.
Did she think, Janet, you had given the world for love and considered it well lost?
I believe she thought I had forgotten my station. Ain't you, sir?
Station! Station! Your station is in my heart, and on the necks of those who would insult you, now and hereafter. Go.
I was soon dressed, and when I heard Mr. Rochester quit Mrs. Fairfax's parlour, I hurried down to it.
The old lady had been reading her morning portion of scripture, the lesson for the day. Her Bible lay open before her, and her spectacles were upon it.
Her occupation, suspended by Mr. Rochester's announcement, seemed now forgotten. Her eyes, fixed on the blank wall opposite, expressed the surprise of a quiet mind stirred by unwanted tidings.
Seeing me, she roused herself. She made a sort of effort to smile, and framed a few words of congratulation, but the smile expired, and the sentence was abandoned and finished.
She put up her spectacles, shut the Bible, and pushed her chair back from the table.
I feel so astonished, she began. I hardly know what to say to you, Miss Eyre. I've surely not been dreaming, have I?
Sometimes I half fall asleep when I'm sitting alone, and fancy things that have never happened.
It has seemed to me, more than once when I've been in a doze, that my dear husband, who died fifteen years since, has come in and sat down beside me, and that I have even heard him call me by my name, Alice, as he used to do.
Now, can you tell me whether it's actually true that Mr. Rochester has asked you to marry him?
Don't laugh at me, but I really thought he came in here five minutes ago, and said that in a month you would be his wife.
He has said the same thing to me, I replied.
He has? Do you believe him? Have you accepted him?
Yes.
She looked at me bewildered.
I could never have thought it.
He is a proud man. All the Rochester's were proud, and his father at least liked money. He, too, has always been called careful.
He means to marry you? He tells me so.
She surveyed my whole person. In her eyes, I read that they had there found no charm powerful enough to solve the enigma.
It passes me, she continued, but no doubt it is true since you say so. How it will answer I cannot tell. I really don't know.
The quality of position and fortune is often advisable in such cases, and there are twenty years of differences in your ages.
He might almost be your father.
No, indeed, Mrs. Fairfax, exclaimed I, needled. He is nothing like my father.
No one who saw us together would suppose it for an instant. Mr. Rochester looks as young, and is as young, as some men of five and twenty.
Is it really for love who is going to marry you? she asked.
I was so hurt by the coldness in her scepticism that the tears rose to my eyes.
I am sorry to grieve you, pursued the widow, but you are so young and so little acquainted with men. I wish to put you on your guard.
It is an old saying that all is not gold with the glitters, and in this case I do fear there will be something found to be different to what either you or I expect.
Why, am I a monster? I said. Is it impossible that Mr. Rochester should have a sincere affection for me?
No, you are very well, and much improved of late, and Mr. Rochester, I dare say, is fond of you.
I have always noticed that you were a sort of pet of his.
There are times when, for your sake, I have been a little uneasy at his much preference, and have wished to put you on your guard.
But I did not like to suggest even the possibility of wrong.
I knew such an idea would shock, perhaps offend you, and you were so discreet, and so thoroughly modest and sensible.
I hope you might be trusted to protect yourself.
Last night I cannot tell you what I suffered when I saw it all over the house, and could find you nowhere, nor the master either, and then at twelve o'clock, so you come in with him.
Well, never mind that now, I interrupted impatiently. It is enough that all was right.
I hope all will be right in the end, she said, but believe me, you cannot be too careful.
Try and keep Mr. Rochester at a distance. Distrust yourself as well as him.
Gentlemen in his station are not accustomed to marry their governesses.
I was growing truly irritated. Happily Adele ran in.
Let me go! Let me go to Melkote too, she cried. Mr. Rochester won't, though there is so much room in the new carriage. Beg him to let me go, Mademoiselle.
That I will, Adele, and I hastened away with her, glad to quit my gloomy monitress.
The carriage was ready, they were bringing it round to the front, and my master was on the pavement, pilot following him backwards and forwards.
Adele may accompany us, may she not, sir?
I told her no, I'll have no brats, I'll have only you.
Do let her go, Mr. Rochester, if you please, it would be better.
Not it, she will be a restraint.
He was quite peremptory, both in look and voice.
The chill of Mrs. Fairfax's warnings and the damp of her doubts were upon me.
Something of unsubstantiality and uncertainty beset my hopes. I have lost a sense of power over him.
I was about, mechanically, to obey him without further remonstrance.
But as he helped me into the carriage he looked at my face.
What is the matter? he asked. All the sunshine is gone.
Do you really wish the band to go? Will it annoy you if she is left behind?
I would rather she went, sir.
Then off with your bonnet and back like a flash of lightning, cried he to Adele.
She obeyed him with what speed she might.
After all, a single morning's interruption will not matter much, said he, when I mean shortly to claim you, your thoughts, conversation and company for life.
Adele, when lifted in, commenced kissing me by way of expressing her gratitude for my intercession.
She was instantly stirred away into a corner of the other side of him.
She then peered around to where I sat, so Stone, a neighbour, was too restrictive to him in his present fractious mood.
She dared whisper no observations, nor ask of him any information.
Let her come to me, I entreated. She will perhaps trouble you, sir. There's plenty of room on this side.
He handed her over as if she had been a lap-dog.
I'll send her to school yet, he said, but now he was smiling.
Adele heard him and asked if she was to go to school, San Mademoiselle.
Yes, he replied, absolutely, San Mademoiselle, for I am to take Mademoiselle to the moon, and there I shall seek a cave in one of the white valleys among the volcano tops, and Mademoiselles shall live with me there and only me.
She'll have nothing to eat. You will starve her, observed Adele.
I shall gather manna for her morning and night. The plains and hillsides in the moon are bleached with manna, Adele.
She'll want to warm herself. What will she do for her fire?
Fire rises out of the lunar mountains. When she's cold, I'll carry her up to a peak and lay her down on the edge of a crater.
Qu'elle sera mal, pour comfortable, and her clothes they will wear out. How can she get new ones?
Mr. Rochester professed to be puzzled.
Hmm, said he. What would you do, Adele?
Could all your brains for an expedient? How would a white or pink cloud answer for a gown, do you think? And could one cut a pretty enough scarf out of a rainbow?
She's far better than she is, concluded Adele, after musing some time.
Besides, if you would get tired of living with only you in the moon, if I were Mademoiselle, I would never consent to go with you.
She has consented. She has pledged her word.
But you can't get her there. There's no road to the moon. It is all air, and neither you nor she can fly.
Adele, look at that field. We were now outside Thornfield Gate, and barrelling lightly along the smooth road to Millcote,
where the dust was well laid by the thunderstorm, and where the low hedges and lofty timber trees on each side glistened green and rain-refreshed.
In that field, Adele, I was walking late one evening about a fortnight since, the evening of the day you helped me to make hay in the orchard meadows.
And as I was tired with raking swaths, I sat down to rest me on a stire, and there I took out a little book and a pencil,
and began to write about a misfortune that befell me long ago, and a wish I had for happy days to come.
I was writing away very fast, though daylight was fading from the leaf, when something came up the path and stopped two yards off me.
I looked at it. It was a little thing with a veil of gossam on its head. I beckoned it to come near me.
It stood soon at my knee. I never spoke to it, and it never spoke to me in words.
But I read its eyes, and it read mine, and our speechless colloquy was to this effect.
It was a fairy, and come from Elfland, it said, and its errand was to make me happy.
I must go with it out of the common world to a lonely place, such as the moon, for instance.
And it nodded its head towards her horn, rising over Hayhill.
It told me of the alabaster cave and silver vale where we might live.
I said I should like to go, but reminded it, as you did me, that I had no wings to fly.
Oh, returned the fairy, that does not signify.
Here is a talisman that will remove all the difficulties.
And she held out a pretty gold ring.
Put it, she said, of the fourth finger of my left hand, and I am yours and your mine,
and we shall leave earth and make our heaven yonder.
She nodded again at the moon.
The ring ideal is in my breecher's pocket, under the disguise of a sovereign.
But I mean soon to change it to a ring again.
But what has Mademoiselle to do with that?
I don't care for the fairy.
You said it was Mademoiselle you would take to the moon.
Mademoiselle is a fairy, he said, whispering mysteriously.
Whereupon I told her not to mind his pain, and she, on her part,
invents the fund of genuine French skepticism, denominating Mr. Rochester,
un rare mentor, and assuring him that she made no account whatever of his con de fille,
and that de reste il y en avait partie fille et quand même il y en avait.
She was sure they would never appear to him, nor ever give him rings,
or offer to live with him in the moon.
The hour spent at Millcote was a somewhat harassing one to me.
Mr. Rochester obliged me to go to a certain silk warehouse.
There I was ordered to choose half a dozen dresses.
I hated the business.
I begged Lee to defer it.
No, it should be gone through with now.
By dint of entreaties expressed in energetic whispers,
I reduced the half-dozen to two.
These, however, he vowed he would select himself.
With anxiety I watched as I rove over the gay stores.
He would fixed on a rich silk with the most brilliant amethyst dye,
and a superb pink satin.
I told him, in a new series of whispers,
that he might as well buy me a gold gown and a silver bonnet at once.
I should certainly never venture to wear his choice.
With infinite difficulty, for he was stubborn as a stone,
I persuaded him to make an exchange in favour of a silver-black satin
and pearl-grey silk.
It might pass for the present, he said,
but he would yet see me glittering like a parterre.
Glad was I to get him out of the silk warehouse,
and then out of a jeweller's shop.
The more he bought me, the more my cheek burned
with a sense of annoyance and degradation.
As we re-entered the carriage, and I sat back feverish, in fact,
I remembered what, in the hurry of events, dark and bright,
I had wholly forgotten.
The letter of my uncle, John Eyre, to Mrs. Reed.
His intention to adopt me make me his legatee.
It would indeed be a relief, I thought,
if I had ever so small an independency.
I never came bare being dressed like a doll by Mr. Rochester
or sitting like a second Darnay
with a golden shower falling daily round me.
I write to Madeira the moment I get home,
and tell my uncle John I am going to be married and to whom.
If I had but a prospect of one day bringing Mr. Rochester
an accession of fortune,
I could better endure to be kept by him now.
And somewhat relieved by this idea,
which I failed not to execute that day,
I ventured once more to meet my master's and lover's eye,
which most pertinently sought mine,
though I averted both face and gaze.
He smiled, and I thought his smile was such as a salt and mite
in a blissful and fond moment,
bestow on a slave his golden gems had enriched.
I crushed his hand, which was ever hunting mine, vigorously,
and thrust it back to him red with a passionate pressure.
You need not look in that way, I said.
If you do, I'll wear nothing but my own low-wood frocks
to the end of the chapter.
I'll be married in this lilac gingham.
You may make a dressing-gown for yourself out of pearly grey silk
and an infinite series of waistcoats out of the black satin.
He chuckled. He rubbed his hands.
Oh, is it rich to see and hear her?
He exclaimed. Is she original? Is she pecaned?
I would not exchange this one little English girl
for the Grand Turk's whole seracchio,
gazellide, hoary forms, and all.
The eastern illusion put me again.
I'll not stand you an inch of this dead in a seracchio, I said,
so don't consider me an equivalent for one.
If you ever fancy for anything in that line,
away with you, sir, to the bazaars of Stamboul without delay,
and lay out in extensive slave purchases
some of that spare cash you seem at a loss to spend satisfactory here.
And what will you do, Janet,
while I am bargaining for so many tons of flesh
and such an assortment of black eyes?
I'll be preparing myself to go out as a missionary
to preach liberty to them that I enslaved,
your harem inmates among the rest.
I'll get admitted there, and I'll stir up mutiny,
and you, three-tailed beshaw, as you are, sir,
shall in a thrice find yourself fettered amongst our hands.
Nor will I, for one, consent to cut your bonds
till you have signed a charter,
the most liberal that this pot has ever yet conferred.
I would consent to be at your mercy, Jane.
I would have no mercy, Mr. Rochester,
if you supplicated for it with an eye like that,
but while you looked so, I should be certain
that whatever charter you might grant under curshion,
your first act, when released, would be to violate its conditions.
Why, Jane, what would you have?
I fear you will compel me to go through a private marriage ceremony
besides that performed at the altar.
You will stipulate, I see, for peculiar terms.
What will they be?
I only want an easy mind, sir,
not crushed by crowded obligations.
Do you remember what you said of Céline Varence?
Of the diamonds the cashmere you gave her?
I will not be your English, Céline Varence.
I shall continue to act as a deals governess.
By that I shall earn my board and lodgings,
and thirty pounds a year besides.
I'll furnish my own wardrobe out of that money,
and you shall give me nothing but...
Well, but what?
Your regard, and if I give you mine in return,
that debt will be quit.
Well, for cool native impotence,
and pure innate pride you haven't your equal, said he.
We were now approaching Thornfield.
Will it please you to dine with me today?
he asked as we re-entered the gates.
No, thank you, sir.
And what for? No thank you, if one may inquire.
I never have dined with you, sir,
and I see no reason why I should now, till...
Till what? You delight in half-phrases.
So I can't help it.
Do you suppose I eat like an ogre or a gowl,
that you dread being the companion of my repast?
I have formed no superstition of the subject, sir,
but I want to go on as usual for another month.
You will give up your governessing slavery at once.
Indeed, begging your pardon, sir, I shall not.
I shall just go on with it as usual.
I shall keep out of your way all day,
as I have been accustomed to do.
You may sing for me in the evening,
when you feel disposed to see me,
and I'll come then, but at no other time.
I want a smoke, Janet,
or a pinch of snuff to comfort me and all this.
Poor me donna own continence, as a deal would say.
And unfortunately I have neither my cigar-case nor my snuff-box.
But listen, whisper,
it is your time now, little tyrant,
but it will be mine presently,
and when I have fairly seized you to heaven to hold,
I'll just, figuratively speaking,
attach you to a chain like this,
touching his watch-guard.
Yes, bunny-wee thing,
I'll wear you in my bosom lest a jewelish time.
He said this as he helped me to alight from the carriage,
and while he afterwards lifted out a deal,
I entered the house and made good my retreat upstairs.
He duly summoned me to his presence in the evening.
I'd prepared an occupation for him,
for I was determined not to spend the whole time
in that city at stake conversation.
I remembered his fine voice,
and knew he liked to sing.
Good singers generally do.
I was no vocalist myself,
and in his fastidious judgment,
no musician either.
But I delighted in listening when the performance was good.
No sooner had twilight that our romance
began to lower her blue and starry banner over the letters,
that I rose,
opened the piano,
and entreated him for the love of heaven to give me a song.
He said I was a capricious witch,
and that he would rather sing another time,
but I averred that no time was like the present.
Did I like his voice?
He asked.
Very much.
I was not fond of pampering that susceptible vanity of his,
but for once, and for motives of expediency,
I would ensueth and stimulate it.
Vain Janet, you must play the accompaniment.
Very well, sir. I will try.
I did try,
but was presently swept off the stool
and denominated a little bungler,
being pushed unceremoniously to one side,
which was precisely what I wanted.
He usurped my place,
and proceeded to accompany himself,
for he could play as well as sing.
I heed me to the winter recess,
and while I sat then,
looked out at the misty trees and dim lawn.
Two sweet airs were sung in mellow tones
the following strain.
The truest love the devil heart
felt at its kindlet's core
did throw each vein in quickened start
the tide of being poor.
Her coming was my hope each day,
her parting was my pain.
The chance that did her steps delay
was ice in every vein.
I dreamed it would be nameless bliss,
as I loved left to be,
and to this object did I press
as blind as eagerly.
But wide as pathless was the space
that lay our lives between,
and dangerous as the foamy race
of ocean surges green,
and haunted as a rubber path
through wilderness or wood,
for might and right,
and woe and wrath,
between our spirits stood.
I dangerous dared,
I hindered and scorned,
I omens did defy.
Whatever menaced, harassed, warned,
I passed impetuous by.
On sped my rainbow
fast as light,
I flew as in a dream,
for glorious rose upon my sight
the child of shower and gleam.
Still bright the clouds of suffering dim,
shines that soft, solemn joy,
nor care I now how dense and grim
disaster's gathered eye.
I care not in this moment sweet,
though all I have rushed o'er,
should come in pinion strong and fleet,
proclaiming vengeance sore.
Though haughty hate should strike me down,
bright bar approached to me,
and grinding might with furious frown,
swear endless enmity.
My love has placed a little hand,
with noble faith in mine,
and vowed that wedlock's sacred band
our nature shall entwine.
My love has sworn with seal and kiss,
with me to live, to die.
I have at last my nameless bliss,
as I love, loved am I.
He rose and came towards me,
and I saw his face all kindled,
with his full falcon eye flashing,
and tenderness and passion in every alignment.
I qualled momentarily.
Then I rallied.
Soft scene, daring demonstration I would not have,
and I stood in peril of both.
A weapon of defence must be prepared.
I wetted my tongue.
As he reached me, I asked with asperity,
Whom he was going to marry now?
That was a strange question
to be put by his darling Jane.
Indeed, I considered it
a very natural and necessary one.
He had talked of his future wife dying with him.
What did he mean by such a pagan idea?
I had no intention of dying with him.
He might depend on that.
Oh, all he longed, all he prayed for,
was that I might live with him.
Death was not for such as I.
Indeed it was.
I had as good a right to die
when my time came as he had,
but I should bide that time
and not be hurried away in a city.
Would I forgive him for the selfish idea
and prove my pardon by a reconciling kiss?
No, I would rather be excused.
Here I heard myself
apostrophised as a hard little thing,
and it was added.
Any other woman would have been melted to marrow
at hearing such stances crooned in her praise.
I assured him I was naturally hard,
very flinty,
and that he would often find me so,
and that, moreover,
I was determined to show him diverse record points
in my character before the ensuring
four weeks elapsed.
He should know full of what sort of bargain
he had made while there was yet time
to rescind it.
Would I be quiet and talk rationally?
I would be quiet if he liked,
and as to talking rationally,
I flattered myself I was doing that now.
He fretted, pitched, and shored.
Very good, I thought.
You may fume and fidget as you please,
but this is the best plan to pursue with you,
I'm certain.
I like you more than I can say,
but I will not sink into baths of sentiment,
and with this needle of riparty
I'll keep you from the edge of a gulf too,
and, moreover,
maintained by its pungent aid,
let distance between you and myself
be most conductive to a real mutual advantage.
From less to more,
I woked him up to considerable irritation.
Then, after he had retired in Dajian,
quite to the other end of the room,
I got up and saying,
I wish you good night, sir,
in my natural and wanted respectful manner.
I stepped out by the side door and got away.
This system thus entered on,
I pursued during the whole season
of probation,
and with the best success.
He was kept, to be sure,
rather crass and crusty,
but on the whole I could see he was
accidentally entertained,
and that a lameplike submission
and turtledove sensibility,
while thus during his despotism
more would have pleased his judgment,
satisfied his common sense,
and even suited his tasteless.
In other people's presence
I was, as formerly,
differential and quiet,
any other line of conduct being uncalled for.
It was only in the evening
conferences I thus
thwarted and afflicted him.
He continued to send for me punctually
the moment the clock struck seven,
though when I appeared before him now
he had no such honeying terms as
love and darling on his lips.
The best words at my service were
provoking puppet,
malicious elf,
sprite, changeling, etc.
For caresses, too,
I now got grimaces,
for a pressure of the hand, a pinch in the arm,
for a kiss on the cheek
as the weird tweak of the ear.
It was all right.
At present I decidedly preferred these fierce
favors to anything more tender.
Mrs. Fairfax, I saw,
approved me. Her anxiety on my
account vanished. Therefore I was
certain I did well.
Meantime Mr. Rochester affirmed that I was
wearing him to skin and bone and threatened
awful vengeance for my present
conduct at some period fast coming.
I laughed in my sleeve at his
menaces.
I can keep you in a reasonable check now,
I reflected, and I don't doubt to be able to
do it hereafter. If one expedient
loses its virtue, another must be
devised.
Yet, after all, my task was not an easy
one. Often I would rather
have pleased than tease him.
My future husband was becoming to me
my whole world, and more than the
world, almost my hope of heaven.
He stood between me and
every thought of religion as
an eclipse intervenes between man and the
broad sun. I could not in
those days seek God for His
creature, of whom I had made an
idol.
The month of courtship had wasted.
Its very last hours were being numbered.
There was no putting off the day that advanced, the bridal day, and all preparations for its
arrival were complete.
I at least had nothing more to do.
There were my trunks, packed, locked, corded, ranged in a row along the wall of my little
chamber.
To-morrow, at this time, there would be far on the road to London.
And so should I, D. V.—or rather, not I, but one Jane Rochester, a person whom as yet
I knew not.
The cards of the address alone remained to nail on.
They lay four little squares in the drawer.
Mr. Rochester had himself written the direction, Mrs. Rochester, Hotel London, on each.
I could not persuade myself to affix them, or to have them affixed.
Mrs. Rochester, she did not exist.
She would not be born till to-morrow, some time after eight o'clock a.m.
And I would wait to be assured she had come into the world alive before I assigned to
her all that property.
It was enough that in yonder closet, opposite my dressing-table, garments, said to be hers,
had already displaced my black-stuff low-wood frock.
For not to me appertained that suit of wedding remnant—the pearl-coloured robe, the vapoury
veil pendant from the usurp portmanteau.
I shut the closet to conceal the strange wraith-like apparel it contained, which, at this evening
hour, nine o'clock, gave out certainly a most ghostly shimmer through the shadow of my apartment.
I will leave you by yourself, White Dream,' I said.
I am feverish.
I hear the wind blowing.
I will go out of doors and feel it.'
It was not only the hurry of preparation that made me feverish, not only the anticipation
of the great change, the new life which was to commence to-morrow.
Both these circumstances had their share doubtless in producing that restless, excited mood which
hurried me forth at this late hour into the darkening grounds.
But a third cause influenced my mind more than they.
I had at heart a strange and anxious thought.
Something had happened which I could not comprehend.
No one knew of, or had seen the event but myself.
It had taken place the preceding night.
Mr. Rochester that night was absent from home, nor was he yet returned.
Business had called him to a small estate of two or three farms he possessed thirty
miles off.
Business it was requisite he should settle in person, previous to his meditated departure
from England.
I waited now his return, eager to disburden my mind, and to seek of him the solution of
the enigma that perplexed me.
Stay till he comes, reader, and when I disclose my secret to him you shall hear the confidence.
I sought the orchard, driven to its shelter by the wind, which all day had blown strong
and full from the south, without, however, bringing a speck of rain.
Instead of subsiding as night drew on, it seemed to augment its rush and deepen its
roar.
The trees blew steadfastly one way, never writhing round, and scarcely tossing back
their boughs once in an hour.
So continuous was the strain bending their branchy heads northward.
The clouds drifted from pole to pole, fast following, mass on mass.
No glimpse of blue sky had been visible that July day.
It was not without a certain wild pleasure I ran before the wind, delivering my trouble
of mind to the measureless air torrent thundering through space.
Descending the laurel walk, I faced the wreck of the chestnut tree.
It stood up black and driven.
The trunk, split down the centre, gasped ghastly.
The clove and hearth were not broken from each other, for the firm base and strong roots
kept them unsundered below.
Though community of vitality was destroyed, the sap could flow no more.
The great boughs on each side were dead, and next winter's tempests would be sure to fell
one or both to earth.
As yet, however, they might be said to form one tree—a ruin, but an entire ruin.
You did right to hold fast to each other, I said, as if the monster splinters were living
things and could hear me.
I think, scathed as you look, and charred and scorched, there must be a little sense
of life in you yet, rising out of that adhesion at the faithful, honest roots.
You will never have green leaves more, never more see birds making nests and singing idols
in your bowels.
The time of pleasure and love is over with you, but you are not desolate.
Each of you has a comrade to sympathise with him in his decay.
As I looked up then, the moon appeared momentarily in that part of the sky which filled their
fissure.
Her disk was blood-red and half overcast.
She seemed to throw on me one bewildered dreary glance, and buried herself again instantly
in the deep drift of cloud.
The wind fell for a second round Thornfield, but far away over wood and water poured a
wild melancholy wail.
It was sad to listen to, and I ran off again.
Here and there I strayed through the orchard, gathered up the apples with which the grass
and the tree roots were thickly strewn.
Then I employed myself in dividing the ripe from the unripe.
I carried them into the house, and put them away in the storeroom.
Then I repaired to the library to ascertain whether the fire was lit, for, though summer,
I knew on such a gloomy evening Mr. Rochester would like to see a cheerful hearth when he
came in.
Yes, the fire had been kindled some time, and burnt well.
I placed his armchair by the chimney-corner, I wheeled the table near it, I let down the
curtain, and had the candles brought in ready for lighting.
More restless than ever when I had completed these arrangements, I could not sit still,
nor even remain in the house.
A little time-piece in the room, and the old clock in the hall, simultaneously struck ten.
How late it grows, I said, I will run down to the gates, it is moonlight at intervals,
I can see a good way on the road.
He may be coming now, and to meet him will save some minutes of suspense.
The wind roared high in the great trees which embowered the gates.
But the road, as far as I could see, to the right hand and the left, was all still and
solitary, save for the shadows of clouds crossing it at intervals as the moon looked out.
It was but a long pale line, unvaried by one moving speck.
A pure ill tear dimmed my eye while I looked, a tear of disappointment and impatience.
Ashamed of it, I wiped it away.
I lingered, the moon shut herself wholly within her chamber, and drew close her curtain of
dense cloud.
The night grew dark, rain came driving fast on the gale.
I wish he would come, I wish he would come!
I exclaimed, ceased with hypochondriac foreboding.
I had expected his arrival before tea.
Now it was dark.
What could keep him?
Had an accident happened?
The event of last night again recurred to me.
I interpreted as a warning of distress.
I feared my hopes were too bright to be realised, and I had enjoyed so much bliss lately that
I imagined my fortune had passed its meridian and must now decline.
While I cannot return to the house, I thought, I cannot sit by the fireside while he is abroad
in inclement weather.
Better tire my limbs than strain my heart.
I will go forward and meet him.
I set out.
I walked fast, but not far.
Ere I had measured a quarter of a mile, I heard the tramp of hooves.
A horseman came on, full gallop.
A dog ran by his side.
Away with evil presentiment, it was he, here he was, mounted on Messoror, followed by Pilate.
He saw me, for the moon had opened a blue field in the sky, and rode in it watery bright.
He took his hat off and waved it round his head.
I now ran to meet him.
There, he exclaimed, as he stretched out his hand and bent from the saddle.
You cannot do without me, that is evident.
Step on my boot-toe.
Give me both hands.
Mount.
I obeyed.
Joy made me agile.
I sprang up before him.
A hearty kissing I got for a welcome, and some boastful triumph, which I swallowed as
well as I could.
He checked himself in his exultation to demand,
"'But is there anything the matter, Janet, that you come to meet me at such an hour?
Is there anything wrong?'
"'No, but I thought you would never come.
I could not bear to wait in the house for you, especially with this rain and wind.'
"'Rain and wind, indeed.
Yes, you are dripping like a mermaid.
Put my cloak round you.
But I think you are feverish, Janet.
Both your cheek and hand are burning hot.
I ask again, is there anything the matter?
Nothing now.
I am neither afraid nor unhappy.'
"'Then you have been both?'
"'Rather.
But I'll tell you all about it by and by, sir, and I dare say you will only laugh at
me for my pains.'
"'I'll laugh at you heartily when to-morrow is past.
Till then I dare not.
My prize is not certain.
This is you, who have been as slippery as an eel this last month, and as thorny as a
brier rose.
I could not lay a finger anywhere, but I was pricked.
And now I seem to have gathered up a stray lamb in my arms.
You wandered out of the fold to seek your shepherd, did you, Jane?'
"'I wanted you, but don't boast.
Here we are at Thornfield.
Now let me get down.'
He landed on the pavement.
As John took his horse, and he followed me into the hall, he told me to make haste and
put something dry on, and then returned to him in the library.
And he stopped me, as I made for the staircase, to exhort a promise that I would not be long.
Nor was I long.
In five minutes I rejoined him.
I found him at supper.
"'Take a seat and bear me company, Jane.
Please God!
It is the last meal but one you will eat at Thornfield Hall for a long time.'
I sat down near him, but told him I could not eat.
"'Is it because you have the prospect of a journey before you, Jane?
Is it the thoughts of going to London that takes away your appetite?'
"'I cannot see my prospects clearly to-night, sir, and I hardly know what thoughts they
have in my head.
Everything in life seems unreal, except me.
I am substantial enough.
Touch me.
You, sir, are the most phantom-like of all.
You are a mere dream.'
He held out his hand, laughing.
"'Is that a dream?' said he, placing it close to my eyes.
He had a rounded muscular and vigorous hand, as well as a long strong arm.
"'Yes, though I touch it, it is a dream,' said I, as I put it down from before my face.
"'Sir, have you finished supper?'
"'Yes, Jane.'
I rang the bell, and ordered away the tray.
When we were alone again, I stirred the fire, and then took a low seat at my master's knee.
"'It is near midnight,' I said.
"'Yes, but remember, Jane, you promised to wake with me the night before my wedding.'
"'I did, and I will keep my promise.
For an hour or two at least, I have no wish to go to bed.'
"'Are all your arrangements complete?'
"'All, sir.'
"'And on my part likewise,' he returned.
"'I have settled everything, and we shall leave Thornfield to-morrow, within half an
hour after our return from church.'
"'Very well, sir.'
"'With what an extraordinary smile you uttered that word.
Very well, Jane.
What a bright spot of colour you have on each cheek!
And how strangely your eyes glitter.
Are you well?'
"'I believe I am.'
"'Believe?
What is the matter?
Tell me what you feel.'
"'I could not, sir.
No words could tell you what I feel.
I wish this present hour would never end.
Who knows with what fate the next may come charged.'
"'This is hypochondria, Jane.
You have been over-excited, or over-fatigued.'
"'Do you, sir, feel calm and happy?'
"'Calm, no.
But happy to the heart's core.'
I looked up at him to read the signs of bliss in his face.
It was ardent and flushed.
"'Give me your confidence, Jane,' he said.
"'Relieve your mind of any way that oppresses it, by imparting it to me.
What do you fear?
That I shall not prove a good husband?'
"'It is the idea furthest from my thoughts.'
"'Are you apprehensive of the new sphere you are about to enter, of the new life into
which you are passing?'
"'No.'
"'You puzzle me, Jane.
Your look and tone of sorrowful audacity perplex and pain me.
I want an explanation.'
"'Then, sir, listen.
You were from home last night.'
"'I was.
I know that.
And you hinted a while ago at something which had happened in my absence.
Nothing, probably, of consequence.
But in short, it has disturbed you.
Let me hear it.'
"'Mrs.
Fairfax has said something, perhaps.
Or you have overheard the servant's talk.
Your sensitive self-respect has been wounded.'
"'No, sir.'
It struck twelve.
I waited till the timepiece had concluded its silver chime, and the clock its horse
vibrating stroke, and then I proceeded.
All day yesterday I was very busy, and very happy in my ceaseless bustle, for I am not,
as you seem to think, troubled by any haunting fears about the new sphere, and so on.
I think it is a glorious thing to have the hope of living with you, because I love you.
No, sir, don't caress me now.
Let me talk undisturbed.'
Yesterday I trusted well in Providence, and believed that events were working together
for your good and mine.
It was a fine day, if you recollect.
The calmness of the air and sky forbade apprehensions respecting your safety or comfort on your
journey.
I walked a little while on the pavement after tea, thinking of you, and as I beheld you
in imagination so near, I scarcely missed your actual presence.
I thought of the life that lay before me—your life, sir—an existence more expansive and
stirring than my own, as much more so as the depth of the sea to which the brook runs are
than the shallows of its own straight channel.
I wondered why moralists call this world a dreary wilderness.
For me it blossomed like a rose.
Just at sunset the air turned cold and the sky cloudy.
I went in.
Sophie called me upstairs to look at my wedding-dress, which they had just brought.
And under it, in the box, I found your present—the veil which, in your princely extravagance,
you sent forth from London—resolved, I suppose, since I would not have jewels, to cheat me
into accepting something as costly.
I smiled as I unfolded it, and devised how I would tease you about your aristocratic
tastes and your efforts to mask your plebeian bride and the attributes of a pares.
I thought how I would carry down to you the square of unembroidered blonde I had myself
as a covering for my low-born head, and ask if that was not good enough for a woman who
could bring her husband neither fortune, beauty, nor connections.
I saw plainly how you would look, and heard you impertuous Republican answers, and your
haughty disavow of any necessity on your part to augment your wealth or elevate your standing
by marrying either a purse or a coronet.
How well you read me, you witch!' interposed Mr. Rochester.
But what did you find in the veil besides its embroidery?
Did you find poison, or a dagger, that you look so mournful now?
No, no, sir.
Besides the delicacy and richness of the fabric, I found nothing save Fairfax Rochester's
pride.
And that did not scare me, because I am used to the sight of the demon.
But, sir, as it grew dark, the wind rose.
It blew yesterday evening, not as it blows now, wild and high, but with a sullen moaning
sound, far more eerie.
I wished you were at home.
I came into this room, and the sight of the empty chair and fireless hearth chilled me.
For some time after I went to bed I could not sleep.
A sense of anxious excitement distressed me.
The gale still rising seemed to my ear to muffle a mournful undersound.
Whether in the house or abroad, I could not at first tell.
But it reoccurred, doubtful yet doleful at every lull.
At last I may doubt it must be some dog howling at a distance.
I was glad when it ceased.
On sleeping I continued in dreams the idea of a dark and gusty night.
I continued also the wish to be with you, and experienced a strange regretful consciousness
of some barrier dividing us.
During all my first sleep I was following the windings of an unknown road.
Total obscurity environed me.
Rain pelted me.
I was burdened with the charge of a little child, a very small creature, too young and
feeble to walk, and which strived in my cold arms and wailed piteously in my ear.
I thought, sir, that you were on the road a long way before me, and I strained every
nerve to overtake you, and made effort and effort to utter your name and entreat you
to stop.
But my movements were fettered, and my voice still died away inarticulate, while you, I
felt, withdrew farther and farther every moment.
And these dreams were in your spirits now, Jane, when I am close to you.
Little nervous subject, forget visionary woe, and think only of real happiness.
You say you love me, Janet.
Yes, I will not forget that.
And you cannot deny it.
Those words did not die inarticulate on your lips.
I heard them clear and soft.
A thought too solemn, perhaps, but sweet as music.
I think it is a glorious thing to have the hope of living with you, Edward, because I
love you.
Do you love me, Jane?
Repeat it.
I do, sir, I do with my whole heart.
Well, he said after some minute's silence.
It is strange, but that sentence has penetrated my breast painfully.
Why?
I think because you said it with such an earnest, religious energy, and because your upward
gaze at me now is the very sublime of faith, truth, and devotion.
It is too much as if some spirit were near me.
Look wicked, Jane, as you know well how to look.
Quain one of your wild, shy, provoking smiles.
Tell me you hate me, tease me, vex me, do anything but move me.
I would rather be incensed than saddened.
I will tease you and vex you to your heart's content when I finish my tale, but hear me
to the end.
I thought, Jane, you had told me all.
I thought I had found the source of your melancholy in a dream.
I shook my head.
What?
Is there more?
But I will not believe it to be anything important.
I warn you of incredulity beforehand.
Go on.'
The disquietude of his air, the somewhat apprehensive impatience of his manner, surprised me.
But I proceeded.
I dreamt another dream, sir, that Thornfield Hall was a dreary ruin, the retreat of bats
and owls.
I thought that of all the stately front nothing remained but a shell-like wall, very high
and very fragile looking.
I wandered, on a moonlit night, through the grass-grown enclosure within.
Here I stumbled over a marble hearth, and there over a fallen fragment of cornice.
Wrapped up in a shawl, I still carried the unknown little child.
I might not lay it down anywhere, however tired were my arms.
However much its weight impeded my progress, I must retain it.
I heard the gallop of a horse at a distance on the road.
I was sure it was you, and you were departing for many years and for a distant country.
I climbed the thin wall with frantic perilous haste, eager to catch one glimpse of you from
the top.
The stones rolled from under my feet, the ivy branches I grasped gave way.
The child clung round my neck in terror and almost strangled me.
At last I gained the summit.
I saw you, like a speck on a white track, lessening every moment.
The blast blew so strong I could not stand.
I sat down on the narrow ledge.
I hushed the scared infant in my lap.
You turned an angle off the road.
I bent forward to take a last look.
The wall crumbled, I was shaken, the child rolled from my knee.
I lost my balance, fell and woke.
Now, Jane, that is all.
All the preface, sir, the tale is yet to come.'
On waking a gleam dazzled my eyes.
I thought, oh, it is daylight.
But I was mistaken, it was only candlelight.
Sophie, I supposed, had come in.
There was a light in the dressing-table, and the door of the closet, where, before going
to bed, I had hung my wedding-dress and veil, stood open.
I heard a rustling there.
I asked, Sophie, what are you doing?
No one answered, but a form emerged from the closet.
It took the light, held it aloft, and surveyed the garments pendant from the portmanteau.
Sophie, Sophie, I again cried, and still it was silent.
I had risen up in bed.
I bent forward.
First surprised, then bewilderment came over me, and then my blood crept cold from my veins.
Mr. Rochester, this was not Sophie.
It was not Leah.
It was not Mrs. Fairfax.
It was not—no, I was sure of it, and I am still.
It was not even that strange woman, Grace Poole.'
"'It must have been one of them,' interrupted my master.
"'No, sir, I solemnly assure you to the contrary.
The shape standing before me had never crossed my eyes within the precincts of Thornfield
Hall before.
The height, the contour, were new to me.
Describe it, Jane.'
"'It seems, sir, a woman tall and large, with thick and dark hair hanging long down
her back.
I know not what dress she had on.
It was white and straight, but with a gown, sheet, or shroud, I cannot tell.'
"'Did you see her face?'
"'Not at first, but presently she took my veil from its place.
She held it up, gazed at it long, and then she threw it over her own head and turned
the mirror.
At that moment I saw the reflection of the visage and features quite distinctly in the
oblong glass.'
"'And how were they?'
"'Fearful and ghastly to me.
Oh, sir, I never saw a face like it.
It was a discoloured face.
It was a savage face.
I wished I could forget the roll of the red eyes, and the fearful blackened inflation
of the liniments.'
"'Ghosts are usually pale, Jane.'
This, sir, was purple.
The lips were swelled and dark, the brow furrowed, the black eyebrows widely raised over the
bloodshot eyes.
Shall I tell you of what it reminded me?'
"'You may.'
"'Of the foul German spectre, the vampire.'
"'Ah!
What did it do?'
"'Sir, it removed my veil from its gaunt head, rent it into two parts, and flinging
both on the floor, trampled on them.
Afterwards it drew aside the winded curtain and looked out.
Perhaps it saw dawn approaching, for taking the candle it retreated to the door.
Just at my bedside the figure stopped, the fiery eyes glared upon me.
She thrust up her candle close to my face, and extinguished it under my eyes.
I was aware her lurid visage flamed over mine, and I lost consciousness for the second time
in my life—only the second time.
I became insensible from terror.'
"'Who was with you when you revived?'
"'No one, sir, but the broad day.
I rose, bathed my head and face in water, drank a long draught, felt that though enfeebled
I was not ill, and determined that to numb at you would I impart this vision.
Now sir, tell me who and what that woman was?'
"'The creature of an overstimulated brain, that is certain.
I must be careful of you, my treasure.
Nerves like yours were not made for rough handling.'
"'Sir, depend on it.
My nerves were not in fault.
The thing was real.
The transaction actually took place.'
"'And your previous dreams?
Were they real, too?
Is Thornfield Hall a ruin?
Am I severed from you by insuperable obstacles?
Am I leaving you without a tear, without a kiss, without a word?
Not yet.
Am I about to do it?
Why, the day is already commenced which is to bind us indissolubly.
And when we are once united there shall be no reoccurrence of these mental terrors.
I guarantee that.'
"'Mental terrors, sir.
I wish I could believe them to be only such.
I wish it more now than ever, since even you cannot explain to me the mystery of that awful
visitant.
And since I cannot do it, Jane, it must have been unreal.'
"'But, sir, when I said so to myself on rising this morning, and when I looked round the
room to gather courage and comfort from the cheerful aspect of each familiar object in
There, on the carpet, I saw what gave the distinct lie to my hypothesis.
The veil torn from top to bottom in two halves.
I felt Mr. Rochester start and shudder.
He hastily flung his arms round me.
"'Thank God,' he exclaimed, that if anything malignant did come near you last night, it
was only the veil that was harmed.
Oh, to think what might have happened!'
He drew his breath short, and strained me so close to him I could scarcely pant.
After some minute's silence he continued cheerily.
"'Now, Janet, I'll explain to you all about it.
It was half a dream, half reality.
A woman did, I doubt not, enter your room.
And that woman was—must have been—Grace Poole.
You call her a strange being yourself.
From all you know you have reasoned so to call her.
What did she do to me?
What to Mason?'
In a state between sleeping and waking you noticed her entrance and her actions.
But feverish, almost delirious as you were, you ascribed to her a goblin appearance different
from her own.
The long dishevelled hair, the swelled black face, the exaggerated stature, were figments
of imagination, results of nightmare.
The spiteful tearing of the veil was real, and it is like her.
I see you would ask why I keep such a woman in my house.
When we be married a year and a day I will tell you, but not now.
Are you satisfied, Jane?
Do you accept my solution of the mystery?'
I reflected, and in truth it appeared to me the only possible one.
Satisfied I was not, but to please him I endeavoured to appear so.
Relieved I certainly did feel, so I answered him with a contented smile.
And now, as it was long past one, I prepared to leave him.
Does not Sophie sleep with Adèle in the nursery?' he asked, as I lit my candle.
Yes, sir, and there is room enough in Adèle's little bed for you.
You must share it with her to-night, Jane.
It is no wonder that the incidents you have related should make you nervous, and I would
rather you did not sleep alone.
Promise me to go to the nursery.'
I shall be very glad to do so, sir.
And fasten the door securely on the inside.
Wake Sophie when you go upstairs, and her pretence of requesting her to rouse you in
good time to-morrow, for you must be dressed and have finished breakfast before eight.
And now, no more sombre thoughts.
Chase dull care away, Janet.
Don't you hear to what soft whispers the wind has fallen?
And there is no more beating of rain against the window panes.
Look here.'
He lifted up the curtain.
It is a lovely night.'
It was.
Half heaven was pure and stainless.
The clouds, now trooping before the winds, which had shifted to the west, were now filing
off eastward in long, silvered columns.
The moon shone peacefully.
Well,' said Mr. Rochester, gazing inquiringly into my eyes,
How is my Janet now?
The night is most serene, sir, and so am I.
And you will not dream of separation and sorrow to-night, but of happy love and blissful union.'
This prediction was but half fulfilled.
I did not indeed dream of sorrow, but as little did I dream of joy, for I never slept at all.
With little Adèle in my arms I watched the slumber of childhood, so tranquil, so passionless,
so innocent, and waited for the coming day.
All my life was awake and a stir in my frame, and as soon as the sun rose I rose too.
I remember Adèle clung to me as I left her, I remember I kissed her as I loosened my little
hands from her neck, and I cried over her with strange emotion, and quitted her because
I feared my sobs would break her still sound repose.
She seemed the emblem of my past life, and he I was now to array myself to meet, the
dread, but adored, type of my unknown future day.
Sophie came at seven to dress me.
She was very long indeed in accomplishing her task, so long that Mr. Rochester, grown
and I suppose impatient of my delay, sent up to ask why I did not come.
She was just fastening my veil, the plain square of blonde, after all, to my hair with
a brooch.
I hurried from under her hands as soon as I could.
Stop, she cried in French, look at yourself in the mirror, you have not taken one peep.
So I turned at the door.
I saw a robed and veiled figure, so unlike my usual self, that it seemed almost like
the image of a stranger.
Jane called the voice, and I hastened down.
I was received at the foot of the stairs by Mr. Rochester.
Lingera, he said, my brain is on fire with impatience, and you, Terry, so long.
He took me into the dining-room, surveyed me keenly all over, pronounced me fair as
a lily at not only the pride of his life, but the desire of his eyes, and then telling
me he would give me but ten minutes to eat some breakfast, he rang the bell.
One of his lately hired servants, a footman, answered it.
Is John getting the carriage ready?
Yes, sir.
Is the luggage brought down?
They are bringing it down, sir.
Go you to the church, see if Mr. Wood, the clergyman, and the clerk are there.
Return and tell me.
The church, as the reader knows, was but just beyond the gates.
The footman soon returned.
Mr. Wood is in the vestry, sir, putting on his surplice.
And the carriage?
The horses are harnessing.
We shall not want it to go to church, but it must be ready the moment we return, all
the boxes and luggage arranged and strapped on, and the coachman in his seat.
Yes, sir.
Jane, are you ready?
I rose.
There were no groomsmen, no bridesmaids, no relatives to wait for, or marshal.
None but Mr. Rochester and I.
Mrs. Fairfax stood in the hall as we passed.
I would faint have spoken to her, but my hand was held by a grasp of iron.
I was hurried along by a stride I could hardly follow, and to look at Mr.
Rochester's face was to feel that not a second of delay would be tolerated for any purpose.
I wonder what other bridegroom ever looked as he did, so bent up to a purpose, so grimly
resolute, or who, under such steadfast brows, ever revealed such flaming and flashing eyes.
I know not whether the day was fair or foul.
In descending the drive, I gazed neither on sky nor earth.
My heart was with my eyes, and both seemed migrated into Mr. Rochester's frame.
I wanted to see the invisible thing on which, as we went along, he appeared to fasten a
glance fierce and fell.
I wanted to feel the thoughts whose force he seemed breasting and resisting.
At the churchyard wicked, he stopped.
He discovered I was quite out of breath.
Am I crawled in my love?
He said.
Delay an instant, lean on me, Jane.
And now I can recall the picture of the grey old house of God rising calm before me, of
a rook wheeling round the steeple, of a ruddy morning sky beyond.
I remember something, too, of the green grave-mounds, and have not forgotten, either, two figures
of strangers, straying amongst the low hillocks and reading the mementos graven on the few
mossy headstones.
I noticed them because, as they saw us, they passed round to the back of the church, and
I doubt not they were going to enter by the side aisle door and witness the ceremony.
By Mr. Rochester they were not observed.
He was earnestly looking at my face, from which the blood hand, I dare say, momentarily
fled, for I felt my forehead dewy and my cheeks and lips cold.
When I rallied, which I soon did, he walked gently with me up the path to the porch.
We entered the quiet and humble temple.
The priest waited in his white surplice at the lowly altar, the clerk beside him.
All was still, two shadows only moved in a remote corner.
My conjecture had been correct.
The strangers had slipped in before us, and they now stood by the vault of the Rochester's,
their backs towards us, viewing through the rails the old time-stained marble tomb, where
a kneeling angel guarded the remains of Damer de Rochester, slain at Marston Moor at the
time of the civil wars, and of Elizabeth, his wife.
Our place was taken at the communion rails.
Hearing a cautious step behind me, I glanced over my shoulder.
One of the strangers, a gentleman evidently, was advancing up the chancel.
The service began.
The explanation of the intent of matrimony was gone through, and then the clergyman came
a step further forward, and bending slightly towards Mr. Rochester, went on.
I require and charge you both, as you will answer at the dreadful day of judgment, when
the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, that if either of you know any impediment
why you may not lawfully be joined together in matrimony, you do now confess it, for be
well assured that so many as are coupled together otherwise than God's word doth allow are not
joined together by God, neither is their matrimony lawful.
He paused, as the custom is.
When is the pause after that sentence ever broken by reply?
Not perhaps once in a hundred years.
Who had not lifted his eyes from his book, and had held his breath but for a moment,
was proceeding.
His hand was already stretched towards Mr. Rochester, as his lips unclosed to ask, Wilt
thou have this woman for thy wedded wife?
When a distinct and near voice said, The marriage cannot go on.
I declare the existence of an impediment.
The clergyman looked up at the speaker, and stood mute.
The clerk did the same.
Mr. Rochester moved slightly, as if an earthquake had rolled under his feet.
Taking a firmer footing, and not turning his head or eyes, he said, Proceed.
Profound silence fell when he had uttered that word, with deep but low intonation.
Presently Mr. Wood said, I cannot proceed without some investigation into what has been
and evidence of its truth or falsehood.
The ceremony is quite broken off, subjoined the voice behind us.
I am in a condition to prove my allegation.
An insuperable impediment to this marriage exists.
Mr. Rochester heard, but he did not.
He stood stubborn and rigid, making no movement but to possess himself of my hand.
What a hot and strong grasp he had, and how like quarried marble was his pale,
firm, massive front at this moment.
How his eyes shone, still watchful, and yet wild beneath.
Mr. Wood seemed at a loss.
What is the nature of the impediment, he asked.
Perhaps it maybe got over, explained away?
Hardly was the answer.
I have called it insuperable, and I speak advisedly.
The speaker came forward and leaned on the rails.
He continued, uttering each word distinctly, calmly, steadily, but not loudly.
It simply consists in the existence of a previous marriage.
Mr. Rochester has a wife now living.
My nerves vibrated to those low-spoken words as they had never vibrated to thunder.
My blood felt their subtle violence as it had never felt frost or fire.
But I was collected, and in no dangerous wounding.
I looked at Mr. Rochester.
I made him look at me.
His whole face was colorless rock.
His eye was both spark and flint.
He disavowed nothing.
It seemed as if he would defy all things.
Without speaking, without smiling, without seeming to recognize in me a human being,
he only twined my waist with his arm and riveted me to his side.
Who are you?
He asked of the intruder.
My name is Briggs, a solicitor of Street London.
And you would thrust on me a wife?
I would remind you of your lady's existence, sir, which the law recognizes if you do not.
Favor me with an account of her, with her name, her parentage, her place of abode.
Certainly, Mr. Briggs calmly took a paper from his pocket and read out in a sort of official nasal voice.
I affirm and can prove that on the 20th of October A.D., a date of 15 years back,
Edward Fairfax Rochester of Thornfield Hall in the county of and of Ferndean Manor in Shea, England,
was married to my sister, Bertha Antoinetta Mason, daughter of Jonas Mason, merchant,
and of Antoinetta, his wife, a Creole, at church, Spanish town, Jamaica.
The record of the marriage will be found in the register of that church.
A copy of it is now in my possession, signed Richard Mason.
That, if a genuine document, may prove I have been married,
but it does not prove that the woman mentioned therein as my wife is still living.
She was living three months ago, returned the lawyer.
How do you know?
I have a witness to the fact, whose testimony even you, sir, will scarcely controvert.
Produce him, or go to hell.
I will produce him first.
He is on the spot.
Mr. Mason, have the goodness to step forward.
Mr. Rochester, on hearing the name, set his teeth.
He experienced, too, a sort of strong convulsive quiver.
Near to him as I was, I felt a spasmodic movement of fury or despair run through his frame.
The second stranger, who had hitherto lingered in the background, now drew near.
A pale face looked over the solicitor's shoulder.
Yes, it was Mason himself.
Mr. Rochester turned and glared at him.
His eye, as I have often said, was a black eye.
It had now a tawny, nay, a bloody light in its gloom, and his face flushed.
Olive-cheek and hue-less forehead received a glow as from spreading, ascending heart-fire.
And he stirred, lifted his strong arm.
He could have struck Mason, dashed him on the church floor,
shocked by ruthless blow, the breath from his body.
But Mason shrank away and cried faintly, Good God!
Contempt fell cool on Mr. Rochester.
His passion died as if a blight had shriveled it up.
He only asked, What have you to say?
An inaudible reply escaped Mason's white lips.
The devil is in it, if you cannot answer distinctly.
I again demand, What have you to say?
Sir, sir, interrupted the clergyman, do not forget you're in a sacred place.
Then addressing Mason, he inquired gently,
Are you aware, sir, whether or not this gentleman's wife is still living?
Courage, urged the lawyer, speak out.
She is now living at Thornfield Hall, said Mason in more articulate tones.
I saw her there last April.
I am her brother.
At Thornfield Hall, ejaculated the clergyman, impossible.
I am an old resident in this neighborhood, sir, and
I never heard of a Mrs. Rochester at Thornfield Hall.
I saw a grim smile contort Mr. Rochester's lips, and he muttered,
No, by God, I took care that none should hear of it, or of her under that name.
He mused, for ten minutes he held counsel with himself.
He formed his resolve and enhanced it.
Enough, all shouts bowed out at once, like the bullet from the barrel.
Wood, close your book and take off your surplus.
John Green, to the clerk, leave the church.
There will be no wedding today.
The man obeyed.
Mr. Rochester continued, hardily and recklessly.
Bigamy is an ugly word.
I meant, however, to be a bigamist, but fate has outmaneuvered me, or
providence has checked me, perhaps the last.
I am little better than a devil at this moment, and as my pastor there would
tell me, deserve no doubt the sternest judgments of God,
even to the quenchless fire and deathless worm.
Gentlemen, my plan is broken up.
What this lawyer and his client say is true.
I have been married, and the woman to whom I was married lives.
You say you never heard of a Mrs. Rochester at the house up yonder, Wood.
But I dare say you have many a time inclined your ear to gossip about the
mysterious lunatic kept there under watch and ward.
Some have whispered to you that she is my bastard half-sister.
Some my cast-off mistress.
I now inform you that she is my wife, whom I married fifteen years ago,
Bertha Mason by name, sister of this resolute personage, who is now with
quivering limbs and white cheeks, showing you what a stout heart men can bear.
Cheer up, Dick, never fear me.
I'd almost as soon strike a woman as you.
Bertha Mason is mad, and she came of a mad family, idiots and maniacs,
through its three generations.
Her mother, a Creole, was both a mad woman and a drunkard, as I found out
after I had wed the daughter, for they were silent on family secrets before.
Bertha, like a dutiful child, copied her parent in both points.
I had a charming partner, pure, wise, modest.
You can fancy I was a happy man.
I went through rich scenes.
Oh, my experience has been heavenly, if you only knew it.
But I owe you no further explanation.
Briggs, Wood, Mason, I invite you all to come up to the house
and visit Mrs. Poole's patient and my wife.
You shall see what sort of a being I was cheated into espousing,
and judge whether or not I had a right to break the compact,
and seek sympathy with something at least human.
This girl, looking at me, knew no more than you, Wood, of the disgusting secret.
She thought all was fair and legal, and never dreamt she was going to be entrapped
into a feigned union with a defrauded wretch,
already bound to a bad, mad, and embruted partner.
Come, all of you, follow.
Still holding me fast, he left the church.
The three gentlemen came after.
At the front door of the hall, we found the carriage.
Take it back to the coach house, John, said Mr. Rochester Cooley.
It will not be wanted today.
At our entrance, Mrs. Fairfax, Adelle Sophie Lee advanced to meet and greet us.
To the right about, every soul, cried the master.
Away with your congratulations.
Who wants them?
Not I. They are fifteen years too late.
He passed on and ascended the stairs, still holding my hand,
and still beckoning the gentlemen to follow him, which they did.
We mounted the first staircase, passed up the gallery,
proceeded to the third story.
The low black door, opened by Mr. Rochester's master key,
admitted us to the tapestryed room, with its great bed and its pictorial cabinet.
You know this place, Mason, said our guide.
She bit and stabbed you here.
He lifted the hangings from the wall, uncovering the second door.
This too he opened.
In a room without a window, there burnt a fire guarded by a high and strong fender,
and a lamp suspended from the ceiling by a chain.
Grace Poole bent over the fire, apparently cooking something in a saucepan.
In the deep shade, at the farther end of the room, a figure ran backwards and forwards.
What it was, were the beast or human being one could not at first sight tell.
It grovelled seemingly on all fours.
It snatched and growled like some strange wild animal,
but it was covered with clothing, and a quantity of dark grizzled hair,
wild as a mane, hid its head and face.
Good morrow, Mrs. Poole, said Mr. Rochester.
How are you, and how is your charge today?
We're tolerable, sir, thank you, replied Grace,
lifting the boiling mess carefully onto the hob.
Rather snappish, but not rages.
A fierce cry seemed to give the lie to her favourable report.
The clothed hyena rose up and stood tall on its hind feet.
Ah, sir, she sees you, exclaimed Grace.
You'd better not stay.
Only a few moments, Grace, you must allow me a few moments.
Take care, then, sir, for God's sake, take care.
The maniac bellowed.
She parted her shaggy locks from her visage,
and gazed wildly at her visitors.
I recognised well that purple face, those bloated features.
Mrs. Poole advanced.
Keep out of the way, said Mr. Rochester, thrusting her aside.
She has no knife now, I suppose, and I am on my guard.
One never knows what she has, sir, she is so cunning.
It is not in mortal discretion to fathom her craft.
We had better leave her, whispered Mason.
Go to the devil, was his brother-in-law's recommendation.
Where? cried Grace.
The three gentlemen retreated simultaneously.
Mr. Rochester flung me behind him.
The lunatic sprang and grappled his throat viciously,
and laid her teeth to his cheek.
They struggled.
She was a big woman, in stature almost equaling her husband,
and corpulent besides, she showed virile force in the contest.
More than once she almost throttled him, athletic as he was.
He could have settled her with a well-planted blow,
but he would not strike, he would only wrestle.
At last he mastered her arms.
Grace Poole gave him a cord, and he pinioned them behind her,
with more rope, which was at hand, he bound her to a chair.
The operation was performed amidst the fiercest yells,
and the most convulsive plunges.
Mr. Rochester then turned to the spectators.
He looked at them with a smile both acrid and desolate.
That is my wife, said he.
Such is the sole conjugal embrace I am ever to know.
Such are the endearments which are to solace my leisure hours,
and this is what I wished to have, laying his hand on my shoulder,
this young girl who stands so grave and quiet at the mouth of hell,
looking collectively at the gambles of a demon.
I wanted her, just as a change after that fierce ragu.
Wooden Briggs, look at the difference.
Compare these clear eyes with a red bald yonder,
this face with that mask, this form with that bulk.
Then judge me, priest of the gospel and man of the law,
and remember with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged.
Off with you now.
I must shut up my prize.
We all withdrew.
Mr. Rochester stayed a moment behind us to give some further order to Grace Poole.
The solicitor addressed me as he descended the stair.
You, madam, said he, are cleared from all blame.
Your uncle will be glad to hear it, if indeed he should be still living,
when Mr. Mason returns to Madeira.
My uncle? What of him? Do you know him?
Mr. Mason does.
Mr. Eyre has been the Funchal correspondent of his house for some years.
When your uncle received your letter intimating the contemplated union between yourself and Mr.
Rochester, Mr. Mason, who was staying at Madeira to recruit his health, on his way back to Jamaica,
happened to be with him.
Mr. Eyre mentioned the intelligence, for he knew that my client here was acquainted with the
gentleman of the name of Rochester.
Mr. Mason, astonished and distressed, as you may suppose, revealed the real state of matters.
Your uncle, I am sorry to say, is now on a sick bed, from which, considering the nature of his
disease, decline, and the stage it has reached, it is unlikely he will ever rise.
He could not then hasten to England himself, to extricate you from the snare into which you had
fallen, but he implored Mr. Mason to lose no time in taking steps to prevent the false marriage.
He referred him to me for assistance.
I used all dispatch, and am thankful I was not too late, as you doubtless must be also.
Were I not morally certain that your uncle will be dead, ere you reach Madeira, I would advise you to
accompany Mr. Mason back, but as it is, I think you had better remain in England till you can hear
further, either from or of Mr. Eyre.
Have we anything else to stay for?
He inquired of Mr. Mason.
No, no, let us be gone, was the anxious reply, and without waiting to take leave of Mr. Rochester,
they made their exit at the hall door.
The clergyman stayed to exchange a few sentences, either of admonition or reproof, with his haughty
parishioner. This duty done, he too departed.
I heard him go, as I stood at the half-open door of my own room, to which I had now withdrawn.
The house cleared, I shut myself in, fastened the belt that none might intrude, and proceeded,
not to weep, not to mourn, I was yet too calm for that, but mechanically to take off the wedding dress
and replace it by the stuff gown I had worn yesterday, as I thought for the last time.
I then sat down, I felt weak and tired, I leaned my arms on a table, and my head dropped on them,
and now I thought, till now I had only heard, seen, moved, followed up and down where I was
led or dragged, watched event rush on event, disclosure open beyond disclosure, but now I thought.
The morning had been a quiet morning enough. All except the brief scene with the lunatic.
The transaction in the church had not been noisy. There was no explosion of passion,
no loud altercation, no dispute, no defiance or challenge, no tears, no sobs. A few words
had been spoken, a calmly pronounced objection to the marriage made, some stern short questions
put by Mr. Rochester, answers, explanations given, evidence adduced, an open admission of
the truth had been uttered by my master. Then the living proof had been seen,
the intruders were gone, and all was over. I was in my own room as usual, just myself,
without obvious change. Nothing had smitten me or scathed me or maimed me.
And yet, where was the Jane Eyre of yesterday? Where was her life? Where were her prospects?
Jane Eyre, who had been an ardent, expectant woman, almost a bride, was a cold, solitary girl
again. Her life was pale, her prospects were desolate. A Christmas frost had come at mid-summer,
a white December storm had whirled over June. Ice glazed the ripe apples. Drifts crushed the
blowing roses. On Hayfield and Cornfield lay a frozen shroud. Lanes, which last night blushed
full of flowers, today were pathless with untrodden snow. And the woods, which twelve hours since,
waved leafy and flagrant as groves between the tropics, now spread waist wild and white as
pine forests in wintry Norway. My hopes were all dead, struck with a subtle doom such as,
in one night, fell on all the first born in the land of Egypt.
I looked on my cherished wishes, yesterday so blooming and glowing,
they lay stark, chill, livid corpses that could never revive. I looked at my love,
that feeling which was my master's, which he had created. It shivered in my heart,
like a suffering child in a cold cradle. Sickness and anguish had seized it.
It could not seek Mr. Rochester's arms. It could not derive warmth from his breast.
Oh, never more could it turn to him, for faith was blighted, confidence destroyed.
Mr. Rochester was not to me what he had been, for he was not what I had sought him.
I would not ascribe vice to him, I would not say he had betrayed me, but the attribute of
stainless truth was gone from his idea, and from his presence I must go, that I perceived well.
When, how, whither, I could not yet discern, but he himself, I doubt not, would hurry me from
Thornfield. Real affection, it seemed, he could not have for me. It had been only fitful passion,
that was borked, he would want me no more. I should fear even to cross his path now,
my view must be hateful to him. Oh, how blind had been my eyes, how weak my conduct.
My eyes were covered and closed. Eddying darkness seemed to swim round me, and reflection came in
as black and confused a flow. Self-abandoned, relaxed, and effortless, I seemed to have laid
me down in the dried-up bed of a great river. I heard a flood loosened in remote mountains,
and felt the torrent come. To rise I had no will, to flee I had no strength.
I lay faint, longing to be dead. One idea only, still throbbed, lifelike within me.
A remembrance of God. It begot an unuttered prayer, those words went wandering up and down
in my rayless mind, as something that should be whispered, but no energy was found to express them.
Be not far from me, for trouble is near, there is none to help.
It was near, and as I had lifted no petition to heaven to avert it,
as I had neither joined my hands, nor bent my knees, nor moved my lips, it came. In full heavy
swing the torrent poured over me. The whole consciousness of my life-lawn, my love lost,
my hope quenched, my faith death-struck, swayed full and mighty above me in one sullen mass.
That bitter hour cannot be described. In truth, the waters came into my soul,
I sank in deep mire, I felt no standing, I came into deep waters. The floods overflowed me.
Sometime in the afternoon, I raised my head, and looking round, and seeing the western sun gelding the sign of its decline on the wall, I asked,
What am I to do? But the answer my mind gave, leave thorn-filled at once, was so prompt, so dread, that I stopped my ears.
I said I could not bear such words now.
That I am not Edward Rochester's wife is the least part of my will, I alleged. That I have wakened out of most glorious dreams, and found them all void and vain, is a horror I could bear and master. But that I must leave him decidedly, instantly, entirely, is intolerable. I cannot do it.
But then, a voice within me averred that I could do it, and foretold that I should do it. I wrestled with my own resolution. I wanted to be weak, that I might avoid the awful passage of further suffering I so laid out for me.
And conscience, turned tyrant, held passion by the throat, told her tauntingly, she had yet but dipped her dainty feet in the slaw, and swore that with that arm of iron he would thrust her down to unsounded depth of agony.
Let me be torn away then, I cried. Let another help me.
No, you shall tear yourself away. None shall help you. You shall yourself pluck out your right eye. Yourself cut off your right hand. Your heart shall be the victim, and you the priest to transfix it.
I rose up suddenly, terror-struck at the solitude which so ruthless a judge haunted, at the silence which so awful a voice filled. My head swam as I stood erect.
I perceived that I was sickening from excitement and indignation. Neither meat nor drink had passed my lips that day, for I had taken no breakfast.
And with a strange bang, I now reflected that, long as I had been shut up here, no message had been sent to ask how I was, or to invite me to come down.
Not even little Adele had tapped at the door. Not even Mrs Fairfax had sought me.
Friends always forget those whom fortune forsakes, I murmured, as I untrew the bolt and passed out.
I stumbled over an obstacle. My head was still dizzy, my sight was dim, and my limbs were feeble. I could not soon recover myself.
I fell, but not on the ground. An outstretched arm caught me. I looked up. I was supported by Mr Rochester, who sat in a chair across my chamber threshold.
You come out at last, he said. Well, I have been waiting for you long, and listening. Yet not one movement have I heard, nor one sob.
Five minutes more of that deathlike hush, and I should have forced the lock like a burglar.
So you shun me? You shut yourself up and grieve alone?
I would rather you had come and abraded me with vehemence. You are passionate. I expected a scene of some kind.
I was prepared for the hot rain of tears. Only I wanted them to be shed on my breast.
Now a senseless floor has received them, or your drenched anchor-chief.
But I err. You have not wept at all. I see a white cheek and a faded eye, but no trace of tears.
I suppose, then, your heart has been weeping blood?
Well, Jane, not a word of reproach? Nothing bitter? Nothing poignant? Nothing to cut a feeling or sting passion?
You sit quietly where I have placed you, and regard me with a weary passive look.
Jane, I never meant to wound you thus. If the man who had but one little yule lamp that was dear to him as a daughter,
that ate of his bread and drank of his cup, and lay in his bosom, had by some mistake slaughtered it at the shambles,
he would not have fruit his bloody blunder more than I now rue mine.
Will you ever forgive me?
Rita, I forgave him at the moment and on the spot. There was such deep remorse in his eye, such true pity in his tone,
such manly energy in his manner, and besides, there was such unchanged love in his whole look and mean.
I forgave him all. Yet, not in words, not outwardly, only at my heart's core.
You know I am a scoundrel, Jane.
Here long he inquired wistfully, wondering, I suppose, at my continued silence and tameness, the result rather of weakness than of will.
Yes, sir. Then tell me so, roundly and sharply. Don't spare me.
I cannot. I am tired and sick. I want some water.
He heaved a sort of shuddering sigh, and taking me in his arms, carried me downstairs.
At first, I did not know to what room he had borne me. All was cloudy to my glazed sight.
Presently I felt the revival warmth of a fire. For summer as it was, I had become icy cold in my chamber.
He put wine to my lips. I tasted it and revived. Then I ate something he offered me, and was soon myself.
I was in the library, sitting in his chair. He was quite near.
If I could go out of life now, without too sharp a bang, it would be well for me, I thought.
Then I should not have to make the effort of cracking my heartstrings in rending them from among Mr. Rochester's.
I must leave him, it appears. I do not want to leave him.
I cannot leave him.
How are you now, Jane?
Much better, sir. I shall be well soon.
Taste the wine again, Jane.
I obeyed him. Then he put the glass on the table, stood before me, and looked at me attentively.
Suddenly he turned away, with an inarticulate exclamation, full of passionate emotion of some kind.
He walked fast through the room and came back. He stooped towards me as if to kiss me.
But I remembered caresses were now forbidden. I turned my face away and put his aside.
What? How is this? He exclaimed heartily.
Oh, I know. You won't kiss the husband of Bertha Mason.
You consider my arms filled and my embraces appropriated?
At any rate, there is neither room nor claim for me, sir.
Why, Jane? I will spare you the trouble of much talking. I will answer for you.
Because I have a wife already, you would reply? I guess rightly?
Yes.
If you think so, you must have a strange opinion of me.
You must regard me as a plotting profligate, a base and low rake who has been simulating disinterested love,
in order to draw you into a snare deliberately laid, and strip you of honour, and rob you of self-respect.
What do you say to that?
I see you can say nothing. In the first place, you are feigned still and have enough to do to draw your breath.
In the second place, you cannot yet accustom yourself to accuse and revile me.
And besides, the floodgates of tears are opened, and they would rush out if you spoke much.
And you have no desire to expostulate, to upbraid, to make a scene.
You are thinking how to act. Talking, you consider, is of no use.
I know you. I am on my guard.
Sir, I do not wish to act against you, I said, and my unsteady voice warned me to curtail my sentence.
Not in your sense of the word, but in mine, you are scheming to destroy me.
You have as good as said that I am a married man.
As a married man, you will shun me, keep out of my way.
Just now, you have refused to kiss me.
You intend to make yourself a complete stranger to me, to live under this roof only as an adult governess.
If ever I say a friendly word to you, if ever a friendly feeling inclines you again to me, you will say,
That man had nearly made me his mistress. I must be ice and rock to him.
And ice and rock you will accordingly become.
I cleared and steadied my voice to reply.
All is changed about me, sir.
I must change too.
There is no doubt of that.
And to avoid fluctuations of feeling and continual combats with recollections and associations, there is only one way.
Adele must have a new governess, sir.
Oh, Adele will go to school.
I have settled that already.
Nor do I mean to torment you with the hideous associations and recollections of Thornfield Hall.
This accursed place, this tent of Aiken, this insolent vault, offering the ghastliness of living death to the light of the open sky.
This narrow stone hell, with its one real fiend, worse than a legion of such as we imagine.
Jane, you shall not stay here.
Nor will I.
I was wrong ever to bring you to Thornfield Hall, knowing as I did how it was haunted.
I charged them to conceal from you, before I ever saw you, all knowledge of the curse of the place.
Merely because I feared Adele never would have a governess to stay if she knew with what inmate she was housed.
And my plans would not permit me to remove the minyak elsewhere, though I possessed an old house, ferned in manner, even more retired and hidden than this, where I could have lodged her safely enough, had not a scruple about the unhealthiness of the situation in the heart of a wood, made my conscience recalled from the arrangement.
Probably those damp walls would soon have eased me of her charge.
But to each villain his own vice, and mine is not a tendency to indirect assassination, even of what I most hate.
Concealing the madwoman's neighbourhood from you, however, was something like covering a child with a cloak and laying it down near a yubus tree.
That demon's vicinage is poisoned, and always was.
But I'll shut up Thornfield Hall, I'll nail up the front door and bolt the lower windows, I'll give Mrs. Poole two hundred a year to live here with my wife, as you term that fearful hag.
Grace will do much for money, and she shall have her son, the keeper at Grimsby Retreat, to bear her company and be at hand to give her aid in the paroxysms.
When my wife is prompted by her familiar to burn people in their beds at night, to stab them, to bite their flesh from their bones and so on, sir, I interrupted him, you are inexorable for that unfortunate lady.
You speak of her with hate, with vindictive antipathy. It is cruel. She cannot help being mad.
Jane, my little darling, so I will call you, for so you are. You don't know what you are talking about. You misjudge me again. It is not because she is mad I hate her.
If you were mad, do you think I should hate you?
I do indeed, sir.
Then you are mistaken, and you know nothing about me, and nothing about the sort of love of which I am capable.
Every atom of your flesh is as dear to me as my own. In pain and sickness it would still be dear.
Your mind is my treasure, and if it were broken, it would be my treasure still. If you raved, my arms should confine you, and not a straight waistcoat.
Your grasp, even in fury, would have a charm for me. If you flew at me as wildly as that woman did this morning, I should receive you in an embrace, at least as fond as it would be restrictive.
I should not shrink from you with disgust as I did from her. In your quiet moments, you should have no watcher and no nurse but me, and I could hang over you with untiring tenderness, though you gave me no smile in return, and never weary of gazing into your eyes, though they had no longer a ray of recognition for me.
But why do I follow that train of ideas? I was talking of removing you from Thornfield. All you know is prepared for prom departure. Tomorrow you shall go.
I only ask you to endure one more night under this roof, Jane, and then farewell to its miseries and terrors for ever. I have a place to repair to, which will be a secure sanctuary from hateful reminiscences, from unwelcome intrusion, even from falsehood and slander.
And take Adele with you, sir, I interrupted. She will be a companion for you.
What do you mean, Jane? I told you I would send Adele to school. And what do I want with a child for a companion, and not my own child, a French dancer's bastard? Why do you importune me about her? I say, why do you assign Adele to me for a companion?
You spoke of retirement, sir. And retirement and solitude are dull. Too dull for you.
Solitude? Solitude? He reiterated with irritation.
I see I must come to an explanation. I don't know what Sphinx-like expression is forming in your countenance. You are to share my solitude. Do you understand?
I shook my head. It required a degree of courage, excited as he was becoming, even to risk that mute sign of descent. He had been walking fast about the room, and he stopped, as if suddenly rooted to one spot.
He looked at me long and hard. I turned my eyes from him, fixed them on the fire, and tried to assume and maintain a quiet, collected respect.
Now for the hitch in Jane's character, he said at last, speaking more calmly than from his look I had expected him to speak. The reel of silk has run smoothly enough so far, but I always knew there would come a knot and a puzzle. Here it is.
Now for vexation and exasperation and endless trouble. By God, I long to exert a fraction of Samson's strength and break the entangled moods like Toe.
He recommands his walk, but soon again stopped, and this time just before me.
Jane, will you hear reason? He stooped and approached his lips to my ear.
Because, if you won't, I'll try violence.
His voice was hoarse. His look, that of a man who is just about to burst an insufferable bond and plunge headlong into white license.
I saw that in another moment, and with one impetus of frenzy more, I should be able to do nothing with him.
The present, the passing second of time, was all I had in which to control and restrain him. A movement of repulsion, flight, fear, would have sealed my doom and haze.
But I was not afraid, not in the least. I felt an inward power, a sense of influence which supported me.
The crisis was perilous, but not without its charm, such as the Indian perhaps feels when he slips over the rapid in his canoe.
I took hold of his clenched hand, loosened the contorted fingers, and said to him, soothingly,
Sit down, I'll talk to you as long as you like, and hear all you have to say, whether reasonable or unreasonable.
He sat down, but he did not get leave to speak directly.
I had been struggling with tears for some time. I had taken great pains to repress them, because I knew he would not like to see me weep.
Now, however, I considered it well to let them flow as freely and as long as they liked. If the flood annoyed him, so much the better. So I gave way and cried heartily.
Soon I heard him earnestly entreating me to become post. I said I could not, while he was in such a passion.
But I am not angry, Jane. I only love you too well. And you had steeled your little pale face with such a resolute, frozen look. I could not endure it.
Hush now, and wipe your eyes.
His softened voice announced that he was subdued, so I, in my turn, became calm.
Now he made an effort to rest his head on my shoulder, but I would not permit it. Then he would draw me to him. No.
Jane! Jane! he said, in such an accent of bitter sadness, it thrilled along every nerve I had.
You don't love me then? It was only my station and the rank of my wife that you valued?
Now that you think me disqualified to become your husband, you recoil from my touch as if I were some toad or ape.
These words cut me. Yet what could I do or say? I ought probably to have done or said nothing.
But I was so tortured by a sense of remorse at thus hurting his feelings, I could not control the wish to drop balm where I had wounded.
I do love you, I said, more than ever, but I must not show or indulge the feeling, and this is the last time I must express it.
The last time, Jane? What? Do you think you can live with me and see me daily, and yet, if you still love me, be always cold and distant?
No, sir. That I am certain I could not. And therefore, I see there is but one way. But you will be furious if I mention it.
Oh, mention it! If I storm, you have the art of weeping.
Mr. Rochester, I must leave you.
For how long, Jane? For a few minutes, while you smooth your hair, which is somewhat disheveled, and bathe your face, which looks feverish?
I must leave Adele and Thornfield. I must part with you for my whole life. I must begin a new existence, among strange faces and strange scenes.
Of course, I told you you should. I pass over the madness about parting from me. You mean you must become a part of me.
As to the new existence, it is all right. You shall yet be my wife. I am not married. You shall be Mrs. Rochester.
Both virtually and nominally, I shall keep only to you, so long as you and I live.
You shall go to a place I have in the south of France, a whitewashed villa on the shores of the Mediterranean.
There you shall live a happy and guarded and most innocent life. Never fear that I wish to lure you into error, to make you my mistress.
Why did you shake your head? Jane, you must be reasonable. Or in truth, I shall again become frantic.
His voice and hand quivered, his large nostrils dilated, his eye blazed. Still, I dare to speak.
Sir, your wife is living. That is a fact acknowledged this morning by yourself. If I lived with you as you desire, I should then be your mistress.
To say otherwise is sophistical, is false. Jane, I am not a gentle tempered man. You forget that.
I am not long enduring. I am not cool and dispassionate. Out of pity to me and yourself, put your finger on my pulse, feel how it throbs, and beware.
He bared his wrist and offered it to me. The blood was forsaking his cheek and lips. They were growing livid.
I was distressed on all hands. To agitate him thus deeply by a resistance he saw aboard was cruel. To yield was out of the question.
I did what human beings do instinctively when they are driven to utter extremity. Looked for aid to one higher than man. The words, God help me, burst involuntarily from my lips.
I am a fool, cried Mr. Rochester suddenly. I keep telling her I am not married and do not explain to her why. I forget she knows nothing of the character of that woman or of the circumstances attending my infernal union with her.
Oh, I am certain Jane will agree with me in opinion when she knows all that I know. Just put your hand in mine, Janet, that I may have the evidence of touch as well as sight to prove your namey, and I will in a few words show you the real state of the case.
Can you listen to me? Yes, sir. For hours, if you will. I only ask minutes. Jane, did you ever hear or know that I was not the eldest son of my house? That I had once a brother older than I?
I remember Mrs. Fairfax told me so once. And did you ever hear that my father was an avaricious, grasping man? I have understood something to that effect.
Well, Jane, being so, it was his resolution to keep the property together. He could not bear the idea of dividing his estate and leaving me a fair portion. All, he resolved, should go to my brother, Rowland.
Yet as little could he endure that a son of his should be a poor man. I must be provided for by a wealthy marriage. He sought me a partner betimes. Mr. Mason, a West India planter and merchant, was his old acquaintance. He was certain his possessions were real and vast. He made inquiries.
Mr. Mason, he found, had a son and daughter. And he learned from him that he could and would give the latter a fortune of thirty thousand pounds. That sufficed.
When I left college, I was sent out to Jamaica to espouse a bride already courted for me. My father said nothing about her money. But he told me Miss Mason was the boast of Spanish town for her beauty. And this was no lie.
I found her a fine woman in the style of Blanche Ingram, tall, dark and majestic. Her family wished to secure me because I was of a good race. And so did she. They showed her to me in parties splendidly dressed. I seldom saw her alone and had very little private conversation with her.
She flattered me and lavishly displayed for my pleasure her charms and accomplishments. All the men in her circle seemed to admire her and envy me. I was dazzled, stimulated. My senses were excited. And being ignorant, raw and inexperienced, I thought I loved her.
There is no folly so besotted that the idiotic rivalries of society, the prurience, the rashness, the blindness of youth, will not hurry a man to its commission. Her relatives encouraged me. Competitors picked me. She alerted me. A marriage was achieved almost before I knew where I was.
Oh, I have no respect for myself when I think of that act. An agony of inward contempt masters me. I never loved, I never esteemed, I did not even know her. I was not sure of the existence of one virtue in her nature.
I had marked neither modesty, nor benevolence, nor candour, nor refinement in her mind or manners. And I married her, gross grovelling more like blockhead than I was. With less sin I might have, but let me remember to whom I am speaking.
My bride's mother I had never seen. I understood she was dead. The honeymoon over, I learned my mistake. She was only mad and shut up in a lunatic asylum. There was a younger brother too, a complete dumb idiot.
The elder one, whom you have seen, and whom I cannot hate whilst I abhor all his kindred, because he has some grains of affection in his feeble mind, shown in the continued interest he takes in his wretched sister, and also in a dog-like attachment he once bore me, will probably be in the same state one day.
My father and my brother Roland knew all this, but they thought only of the thirty thousand pounds and joined in the plot against me. These were vile discoveries, but except from the treachery of concealment, I should have made them no subject of reproach to my wife.
Even when I found her nature wholly alien to mine, her taste obnoxious to me, her cast of mind common, low, narrow, and singularly incapable of being led to anything higher, expended to anything larger, when I found that I could not pass a single evening, nor even a single hour of the day with her in comfort.
That kindly conversation could not be sustained between us, because whatever topic I started, immediately received from her a turn at once coarse and trite, perverse and imbecile.
When I perceived that I should never have a quiet or settled household, because no servant would bear the continued outbreaks of her violent and unreasonable temper, or the vexations of her absurd, contradictory, exacting orders, even then I restrained myself.
I issued a breeding, I curtailed remonstrance. I tried to devour my repentance and disgust in secret. I repressed the deep antipathy I felt. Jane, I will not trouble you with abominable details. Some strong words shall express what I have to say.
I lived with that woman upstairs four years, and before that time she had tried me indeed. Her character ripened and developed with frightful rapidity. Her vices sprang up fast and rank. They were so strong, only cruelty could check them, and I would not use cruelty.
What a pygmy intellect she had, and what giant propensities! How fearful were the curses those propensities entailed on me! Bertha Mason, the true daughter of an infamous mother, dragged me through all the hideous and degrading agonies which must attend a man bound to a wife at once intemperate and unchaste.
My brother in the interval was dead, and at the end of the four years my father died too. I was rich enough now, yet poor to hideous indigence. A nature the most gross, impure, deprave I ever saw was associated with mine, and called by the law and by society a part of me.
And I could not read myself of it by any legal proceedings, for the doctors now discovered that my wife was mad. Her excesses had prematurely developed the germs of insanity.
Jane, you don't like my narrative? You look almost sick. Shall I defer the rest to another day?
No, sir. Finish it now. I pity you. I do pity you.
Pity, Jane, from some people, is a noxious and insulting sort of tribute, which one is justified in hurling back in the teeth of those who offer it. But that is the sort of pity native to callous, selfish hearts. It is a hybrid egotistical pain at hearing of woes, crossed with ignorant contempt for those who have endured them.
But that is not your pity, Jane. It is not the feeling of which your whole face is full at this moment, with which your eyes are now almost overflowing, with which your heart is heaving, with which your hand is trembling in mine.
Your pity, my darling, is the suffering mother of love. Its anguish is the very natal pang of the divine passion. I accept it, Jane. Let the daughter have free advance. My arms wait to receive her.
Now, sir, proceed. What did you do when you found she was mad?
Jane, I approached the verge of despair. A remnant of self-respect was all that intervened between me and the girls. In the eyes of the world, I was doubtless covered with grimy dishonour.
But I resolved to be clean in my own sight, and to the last I repudiated the contamination of her crimes and wrenched myself from connection with her mental defects.
Still, society associated my name and person with hers. I yet saw her and heard her daily, something of her breath, for mixed with the air I breathed. And besides, I remembered I had once been her husband.
That recollection was then, and is now, inexpressibly odious to me. Moreover, I knew that while she lived I could never be the husband of another and better wife.
And though five years my senior, her family and her father had lied to me, even in the particular of her age, she was likely to live as long as I, being as robust in frame as she was in firm in mind.
Thus, at the age of twenty-six, I was hopeless.
One night I had been awakened by her yells, since the medical man had pronounced her mad, she had of course been shut up. It was a fiery West Indian night, one of the description that frequently preceded the hurricanes of those climates.
Being unable to sleep in bed, I got up and opened the window. The air was like sulfur streams. I could find no refreshment anywhere. Mosquitoes came buzzing in and hummed sullenly round the room.
The sea, which I could hear from thence, rumbled dull like an earthquake. Black clouds were casting up over it. The moon was setting in the waves, broad and red, like a hot cannonball.
She threw her last bloody glance over a world quivering with a ferment of tempest. I was physically influenced by the atmosphere unseen, and my ears were filled with the curse of a maniac still shrieked out.
Weren't she momentarily mingled my name with such a tone of demon hate, with such language, no Professor Harlot ever had a foul of vocabulary than she. Though two rooms off, I heard every word, the thin partitions of the West Indian house, opposing but slight obstruction to her wolfish cries.
This life, said I at last, is hell. This is the air. Those are the sounds of the bottomless pit. I have a right to deliver myself from it if I can.
The sufferings of this mortal state will leave me with the heavy flesh that now cumbers my soul. Of the fanatic's burning eternity, I have no fear. There is not a future state worse than this present one. Let me break away and go home to God.
I said this whilst I knelt down it, and unlocked a trunk which contained a brace of loaded pistols. I meant to shoot myself. I only entertain the intention for a moment, for not being insane. The crisis of exquisite and unalloyed despair, which had originated the wish and design of self-destruction, was passed in a second.
A wind fresh from Europe blew over the ocean and rushed through the open casement. The storm broke, streamed, thundered, blazed, and the air grew pure. I then framed and fixed a resolution.
While I walked under the dripping orange trees of my wet garden, and amongst its drenched pomegranates and pineapples, and while the refogging dawn of the tropics kindled round me, I reasoned thus Jane. And now listen, for it was true wisdom that consoled me in that hour, and showed me the right path to follow.
The sweet wind from Europe was still whispering in the refreshed leaves, and the Atlantic was thundering in glorious liberty. My heart, dried up and scorched for a long time, swelled to the tone, and filled with living blood, my being longed for renewal, my soul thirst for a pure draught.
I saw hope revive, and felt regeneration possible. From a flowery arch at the bottom of my garden, I gazed over the sea, bluer than the sky. The old world was beyond. Clear prospects opened thus.
Go, said hope, and live again in Europe. There is not known what a solid name you bear, nor that a filthy burden is bound to you. You may take the maniac with you to England, confine her with due attendance and precautions at Thornfield, then travel yourself to what clime you will, and form what new tie you like.
That woman who has so abused your longsuffering, so sullied your name, so outraged your honour, so blighted your youth, is not your wife, nor are you her husband. See that she is scared for as her condition demands, and you have done all that God and humanity requires of you.
Let her identity, her connection with yourself, be buried in oblivion. You are bound to impart them to no living being. Place her in safety and comfort. Shelter her degradation with secrecy, and leave her.
I acted precisely on this suggestion. My father and brother had not made my marriage known to their acquaintance, because in the very first letter I wrote to apprise them of the Union, having already begun to experience extreme disgust of its consequences, and from the family character and constitution seeing a hideous future opening to me,
I added an urgent charge to keep it secret, and very soon the infamous conduct of the wife my father had selected for me was such as to make him blush to own her as his daughter-in-law. Far from desiring to publish the connection, he became as anxious to conceal it as myself.
To England, then, I conveyed her. A fearful voyage I had, with such a monster in the vessel. Glad was I, when I at last got her to Thornfield, and saw her safely lodged in that third-story room, of whose secret in a cabinet she has now for ten years made a wild beast stand, a goblin's cell.
I had some trouble in finding an attendant for her, as it was necessary to select one on whose fidelity dependence could be placed, for her ravings would inevitably betray my secret. Besides, she had lucid intervals of days, sometimes weeks, which she filled up with abuse of me.
At last I hired Grace Poole from the Grimsby retreat. She and the surgeon, Carter, who dressed Mason's wounds that night he was stabbed and worried, are the only two I have ever admitted to my confidence. Mrs Fairfax may indeed have suspected something, but she could have gained no precise knowledge as to facts.
Grace has, on the whole, proved a good keeper, though owing partly to a fault of her own, of which it appears nothing can cure her, and which is incident to her harassing profession. Her vigilance has been more than once lulled and baffled.
The lunatic is both cunning and malignant. She has never failed to take advantage of her guardian's temporary lapses, once to secret the knife with which she stabbed her brother, and twice to possess herself of the key of her cell, an issue therefrom in the night-time.
On the first of these occasions, she perpetrated the attempt to burn me in my bed. On the second, she paid that ghastly visit to you. I thank Providence, who watched over you, that she then spent her fury on your wedding apparel, which perhaps brought back vague reminiscences of her own bridal days.
But on what might have happened, I cannot endure to reflect. When I think of the thing which flew at my throat this morning, hanging its black and scarlet visage over the nest of my dove, my blood curdles.
And what, sir, I asked while he paused, did you do when you had settled her here? Where did you go?
What did I do, Jane? I transformed myself into a willow-the-wisp. Where did I go? I pursued wanderings as wild as those of the March Spirit. I saw the continent, and went devious through all its lands.
My fixed desire was to seek and find a good and intelligent woman whom I could love, a contrast to the fury I left at Thornfield.
But you could not marry, sir.
I had determined and was convinced that I could and ought. It was not my original intention to deceive, as I have deceived you.
I meant to tell my tale plainly and make my proposals openly, and it appeared to me so absolutely rational that I should be considered free to love and be loved. I never doubted some woman might be found willing and able to understand my case and accept it, in spite of the curse with which I was burdened.
Well, sir?
When you are inquisitive, Jane, you always make me smile. You open your eyes like an eager bird and make every now and then a restless movement, as if answers in speech did not flow fast enough for you and you wanted to read the tablet of one's heart.
But before I go on, tell me what you mean by your, well, sir? It is a small phrase, very frequent with you, and which many a time has drawn me on and on through interminable talk. I don't very well know why.
I mean, what next? How did you proceed? What came of such an event? Precisely. And what do you wish to know now? Whether you found anyone you liked? Whether you asked her to marry you? And what she said?
I can tell you whether I found anyone I liked and whether I asked her to marry me, but what she said is yet to be recorded in the Book of Fate.
For ten long years I roved about, living first in one capital, then another. Sometimes in St. Petersburg, oftener in Paris, occasionally in Rome, Naples and Florence. Provided with plenty of money and the passport of an old name, I could choose my own society.
No circles were closed against me. I sought my ideal of a woman amongst English ladies, French countesses, Italian signoras and German graffiton. I could not find her. Sometimes, for a fleeting moment, I thought I caught a glance, heard a tone, beheld a form which announced the realization of my dream. But I was presently undeceived.
You are not to suppose that I desired perfection, either of mind or person. I longed only for what suited me, for the antipodes of the Creole, and I longed vainly. Amongst them all, I found not one whom, had I been ever so free, I warned as I was of the risks, the horrors, the loathings of incongruous unions, would have asked to marry me.
Disappointment made me reckless. I tried dissipation, never debauchery, that I hated and hate. That was my Indian miscellaneous attribute. Rooted disgust at it and her restrained me much, even in pleasure. An enjoyment that bordered on riots seemed to approach me to her and her vices, and I eschewed it.
Yet I could not live alone, so I tried the companionship of mistresses. The first I chose was Céline Varan, another of those steps which made a man spurn himself when he recalls them. You already know what she was, and how my liaison with her terminated.
She had two successors, an Italian, Jacinta, and a German, Clara, both considered singularly handsome. What was their beauty to me in a few weeks? Jacinta was unprincipled and violent. I tired of her in three months.
Clara was honest and quiet, but heavy, mindless, and unimpressible. Not one whit to my taste. I was glad to give her a sufficient sum to set her up in a good line of business, and so get decently rid of her. But Jane, I see by your face you are not forming a very favorable opinion of me just now.
You think me an unfeeling loose principal, Rick, don't you? I don't like you so well as I have done sometimes, indeed, sir. Did it not seem to you in the least wrong to live in that way, first with one mistress, then another? You talk of it as a mere matter of cause.
It was with me, and I did not like it. It was a grovelling fashion of existence. I should never like to return to it. Hiring a mistress is the next worth thing to buying a slave. Both are often by nature and always by position inferior, and to live familiarly with inferiors is degrading.
I now hate the recollection of the time I passed with Celine, Jacinta, and Clara.
I felt the truth of these words, and I drew from them the certain inference that if I were so far to forget myself and all the teachings that had ever been instilled into me, as under any pretext, with any justification, through any temptation, to become the successor of these poor girls, he would one day regard me with the same feeling which now in his mind desecrated their memory.
I did not give utterance to this conviction. It was enough to feel it. I impressed it on my heart that it might remain there to serve me as aid in the time of trial.
Now, Jane, why don't you say, well, sir, I have not done?
You are looking grave. You disapprove of me still, I see. But let me come to the point.
Last January, rid of all mistresses, in a harsh bitter frame of mind, the result of a useless, roving, lonely life, corroded with disappointment, sourly disposed against all men, and especially against all womankind, for I began to regard the notion of an intellectual, faithful, loving woman as a mere dream.
Recalled by business, I came back to England. On a frosty winter afternoon, I rode inside of Thornfield Hall, a bored spot. I expected no peace, no pleasure there.
On a stile in Hay Lane, I saw a quiet little figure sitting by itself. I passed it, as negligently as I did the polluted willow opposite to it. I had no presentiment of what it would be to me, no inward warning that the arbitrest of my life, my genius for good or evil, waited there in humble guise.
I did not know it, even when, on the occasion of Mithril's accident, it came up and gravely offered me help. Childish and slander creature. It seemed as if a lynet had hopped to my foot and proposed to bear me on its tiny wing. I was surly.
But the thing would not go. It stood by me with strange perseverance, and looked and spoke with a sort of authority. I must be aided, and by that hand, and aided I was.
When once I had pressed the frail shoulder, something new, a fresh sap and scents, stole into my frame. It was well I had learned that this elf must return to me, that it belonged to my house down below. Or I could not have felt it pass away from under my hand, and seen it vanish behind the dim hedge, without singular regret.
I heard you come home that night, Jane, though probably you were not aware that I thought of you, or watched for you. The next day, I observed you, myself unseen, for half an hour, while you played with Adele in the gallery.
It was a snowy day, I recollect, and you could not go out of doors. I was in my room. The door was ajar. I could both listen and watch.
Adele claimed your outward attention for a while, yet I fancied your thoughts were elsewhere. But you were very patient with our my little Jane. You talked to her and amused her a long time. When at last she left you, you lapsed at once into deep reverie. You betook yourself slowly to pace the gallery.
Now and then, in passing a casement, you glanced out at the thick falling snow. You listened to the subbing wind, and again you paced gently on and dreamt. I think those day visions were not dark. There was a pleasurable illumination in your eye occasionally, a soft excitement in your aspect, which told of no bitter, bilious, hypochondriac pruding.
Your look revealed rather the sweet musings of youth, when its spirit follows on willing wings the flight of hope up and on to an ideal heaven. The voice of Mrs Fairfax, speaking to a servant in the hall, wakened you.
And how curiously you smiled to and at yourself, Janet. There was much sense in your smile. It was very shrewd, and seemed to make light of your own abstraction. It seemed to say, My fine visions are all very well. But I must not forget they are absolutely unreal.
I have a rosy sky and a green flowery Eden in my brain, but without, I am perfectly aware, lies at my feet a rough track to travel, and around me gather black tempests to encounter.
You ran downstairs and demanded of Mrs Fairfax some occupation. The weekly house accounts to make up, or something of that sort, I think it was. I was vexed with you for getting out of my sight. Impatiently I waited for evening, when I might summon you to my presence.
An unusual, to me, a perfectly new character I suspected was yours. I desired to search deeper and know it better. You entered the room with a look and air at once shy and independent. You were quaintly dressed, much as you are now.
I made you talk. Here long I found you full of strange contrasts. Your garb and manner were restricted by rule. Your air was often diffident, and altogether that of one refined by nature, but absolutely unused to society, and a good deal afraid of making herself disadvantageously conspicuous by some solicism or blunder.
Yet, when addressed, you lifted a keen, a daring, and a glowing eye to your interlocutus face. There was penetration and power in each glance you gave. When plied by close questions, you found ready and round answers.
Very soon you seemed to get used to me. I believe you felt the existence of sympathy between you and your dream and crossmaster, Jane, for it was astonishing to see how quickly a certain pleasant ease tranquilized your manner.
Snarl as I would, you showed no surprise, fear, annoyance, or displeasure at my morose-ness. You watched me, and now and then smiled at me with a simple, yet sagacious grace I cannot describe. I was at once content and stimulated with what I saw. I liked what I had seen and wished to see more.
Yet, for a long time, I treated you distantly and sought your company rarely. I was an intellectual epicure, and wished to prolong the gratification of making this novel and picket acquaintance.
Besides, I was for a while troubled with the haunting fear that, if I handled the flower freely, its bloom would fade. The sweet charm of freshness would leave it.
I did not then know that it was no transitory blossom, but rather the radiant resemblance of one, cut in an indestructible gem.
Moreover, I wished to see whether you would seek me if I shunned you, but you did not. You kept in the schoolroom as still as your own desk and easel. If by chance I met you, you passed me as soon and with as little token of recognition as was consistent with respect.
Your habitual expression in those days, Jane, was a thoughtful look. Not despondent, for you were not sickly, but not buoyant, for you had little hope and no actual pleasure.
I wondered what you thought of me, or if you ever thought of me. To find this out, I resumed my notice of you. There was something glad in your glance and genial in your manner when you conversed. I saw you had a social heart. It was the silent schoolroom. It was the tedium of your life that made you mournful.
I permitted myself the delight of being kind to you. Kindness stirred emotion soon. Your face became soft in expression. Your tones gentle. I liked my name pronounced by your lips in a grateful, happy accent.
I used to enjoy a chance meeting with you, Jane, at this time. There was a curious hesitation in your manner. You glanced at me with a slight trouble, a hovering doubt. You did not know what my caprice might be, whether I was going to play the master and be stern, or the friend and be benignant.
I was now too fond of you often to stimulate the first whim, and, when I stretched my hand out cordially, such bloom and light and bliss rose to your young, wistful features. I had much adore often, to avoid straining you then and there to my heart.
Don't talk any more of those days, sir," I interrupted, furtively dashing away some tears from my eyes. His language was torture to me. For I knew what I must do, and do soon, and all these reminiscences and these revelations of his feelings only made my work more difficult.
No, Jane, he returned. What necessity is there to dwell on the past, when the present is so much surer, the future so much brighter? I shuddered to hear the infatuated assertion.
You see now how the case stands, do you not? he continued. After a youth and manhood passed half in unutterable misery and half in dreary solitude, I have, for the first time, found what I can truly love. I have found you.
You are my sympathy, my better self, my good angel. I am bound to you with a strong attachment. I think you good, gifted, lovely. A fervent, a solemn passion is conceived in my heart.
It leans to you, draws you to my center and spring of life, wraps my existence about you, and kindling in pure, powerful flame, fuses you and me in one.
It was because I felt and knew this that I resolved to marry you. To tell me that I had already a wife is empty mockery. You know now that I had but a hideous demon. I was wrong to attempt to deceive you, but I feared a stubbornness that exists in your character.
I feared early instilled prejudice. I wanted to have you safe before hazarding conferences. This was cowardly. I should have appealed to your nobleness and magnanimity at first, as I do now, opened to you plainly my life of agony,
described to you my hunger and thirst after a higher and worthier existence, shown to you not my resolution, that word is weak, but my resistless bent to love faithfully and well, where I am faithfully and well loved in return.
Then I should have asked you to accept my pledge of fidelity and to give me yours. Jane, give it me now.
A pause.
Why are you silent, Jane?
I was experiencing an ordeal. A hand of fiery iron crossed my vitals. A terrible moment, full of struggle, blackness, burning. Not a human being that ever lived could wish to be loved better than I was loved, and him who thus loved me I absolutely worshipped, and I must renounce love and idol.
One gray word comprised my intolerable duty. Depart.
Jane, you understand what I want of you?
Just this promise. I will be yours, Mr. Rochester.
Mr. Rochester, I will not be yours.
Another long silence.
Jane, recommends he, with a gentleness that broke me down with grief and turned me stone cold with ominous terror for this still voice with the pant of a lion rising.
Jane, do you mean to go one way in the world and to let me go another?
I do.
Jane, bending towards me and embracing me, do you mean it now?
And now?
Softly kissing my forehead and cheek. I do, extricating myself from restraint rapidly and completely.
Oh, Jane, this is bitter. This is wicked. It would not be wicked to love me.
It would to obey you.
A wide look raised his brows, crossed his features. He rose, but he forbore yet.
I laid my hand on the back of a chair for support. I shook. I feared. But I resolved.
One instant, Jane. Give one glance to my horrible life when you are gone. All happiness will be torn away with you. What then is left?
For a wife I have but the maniac upstairs. As well might you refer me to some corpse in yonder churchyard.
What shall I do, Jane? Where turn for a companion and for some hope?
Do as I do. Trust in God and yourself. Believe in heaven. Hope to meet again there.
Then you shall not yield?
No.
Then you condemn me to live wretched and to die accursed? His voice rose.
I advise you to live sinless, and I wish you to die tranquil.
Then you snatch love and innocence from me? You fling me back on lust for a passion? Vice for an occupation?
Mr. Rochester, I no more assign this fate to you than I grasp at it for myself.
We were born to strive and endure. You as well as I. Do so. You will forget me before I forget you.
You make me a liar by such language. You sully my honor. I declared I could not change. You tell me to my face I shall change soon.
And what a distortion in your judgment! What a perversity in your ideas is proved by your conduct!
Is it better to drive a fellow creature to despair than to transgress a mere human law, no man being injured by the breach?
For you have neither relatives nor acquaintances whom you need fear to offend by living with me.
This was true. And while he spoke, my very conscience and reason turned traitors against me, and charged me with crime in resisting him.
They spoke almost as loud as feeling, and that claimed widely.
O comply, it said! Think of his misery! Think of his danger! Look at his state when left alone!
Remember his headlong nature! Consider the recklessness following on despair! Soothe him! Save him! Love him! Tell him you love him and will be his!
Who in the world cares for you? Or who will be injured by what you do?
Still, indomitable was the reply.
I care for myself. The more solitary, the more friendless, the more unsustained I am, the more I will respect myself.
I will keep the law given by God, sanctioned by man. I will hold to the principles received by me when I was sane and not mad, as I am now.
Laws and principles are not for times when there is no temptation. They are for such moments as this, when body and soul rise in mutiny against their rigor.
Stringent are they, inviolate they shall be. If at my individual convenience I might break them, what would be their worth?
They have a worth, so I have always believed, and if I cannot believe it now, it is because I am insane, quite insane, with my veins running fire and my heart beating faster than I can count its throbs.
Preconceived opinions, foregone determinations are all I have at this hour to stand by. There I plant my foot.
I did.
Mr. Rochester, reading my countenance, saw I had done so. His fury was wrought to the highest. He must yield to it for a moment, whatever followed.
He crossed the floor and seized my arm and grasped my waist. He seemed to devour me with his flaming glance.
Physically, I felt at the moment, powerless as stubble exposed to the draught and glow of a furnace.
Mentally, I still possessed my soul, and with it the certainty of ultimate safety.
The soul, fortunately, has an interpreter, often an unconscious but still a faithful interpreter, in the eye.
My eye rose to his, and while I looked in his fierce face, I gave an involuntary sigh. His grip was painful, and my overtaxed strength almost exhausted.
Never, said he, as he ground his teeth, never was anything at once so frail and so indomitable, a mere reed she feels in my hand.
And he shook me with the force of his hold. I could bend her with my finger and thumb, and what good would it do if I bent, if I upstore, if I crushed her?
Consider that eye. Consider the resolute, wild, frithing, looking out of it. Define me with more than courage, with a stern triumph.
Whatever I do with its cage, I cannot get at it, the savage, beautiful creature. If I tear, if I rend the slight prison, my outrage will only let the captive lose.
Conqueror I might be of the house, but the inmate would escape to heaven before I could call myself possessor of its clay-dwelling place.
And it is you, spirit, with will and energy and virtue and purity that I want, not alone your brittle frame.
Of yourself, you could come with soft flight and nestle against my heart if you would. Seized against your will, you will elude the grasp like an essence. You will vanish ere I inhale your fragrance.
Oh, come, Jane, come!
As he said this, he released me from his clutch and only looked at me. The look was far worse to resist than the frantic strain. Only an idiot, however, would have succumbed to now.
I had dared and baffled his fury. I must elude his sorrow. I retired to the door.
You are going, Jane?
I am going, sir.
You are leaving me?
Yes.
You will not come? You will not be my comforter, my rescuer? My deep love, my wild woe, my frantic prayer are all nothing to you?
What an unutterable pathos was in his voice! How hard it was to reiterate firmly, I am going.
Jane! Mr. Rochester!
Withdraw then, I consent. But remember, you leave me here in anguish. Go up to your own room. Think over all I have said. And, Jane, cast a glance on my sufferings. Think of me.
He turned away. He threw himself on his face on the sofa.
Oh, Jane! My hope! My love! My life!
Broken anguish from his lips. Then came a deep, strong sob. I had already gained the door. But, reader, I walked back. Walked back as determinedly as I had retreated.
I knelt down by him. I turned his face from the cushion to me. I kissed his cheek. I smoothed his hair with my hand.
God bless you, my dear master, I said. God keep you from harm and wrong. Direct you, soulless you. Reward you well for your past kindness to me.
Little Jane's love would have been my best reward, he answered. Without it, my heart is broken.
But Jane will give me her love. Yes, nobly, generously.
Up the blood rushed to his face. Fourth flashed the fire from his eyes. Erect his prank. He held his arms out. But I evaded the embrace and at once quitted the room.
Farewell was the cry of my heart as I left him. Despair added. Farewell forever.
That night I never thought to sleep. But a slumber fell on me as soon as I lay down in bed. I was transported in thought to the scenes of childhood.
I dreamt I lay in the red room at Gatehead. That the night was dark and my mind impressed with strange fears.
The light that long ago had struck me into syncope, recalled in this vision, seemed glidingly to mount the wall and tremingly to pause in the centre of the obscured ceiling.
I lifted up my head to look. The roof resolved to clouds, high and dim. The gleam was such as the moon imparts to vapours she is about to sever.
I watched her come. Watched with the strangest anticipation, as though some word of doom were to be written on her disk.
She broke forth as never moon yet burst from cloud. A hand first penetrated the sable folds and waved them away.
Then, not a moon, but a white human form shone in the azure, inclining a glorious brow earthward.
It gazed and gazed on me. It spoke to my spirit. Immeasurably distant was the tone, yet so near. It whispered in my heart.
My daughter, flea-demptation.
Mother, I will.
So I answered after I had waked from the trance-like dream.
It was yet night, but July nights are short. Soon after midnight, dawn comes.
It cannot be too early to commence the task I have to fulfil, thought I.
I rose. I was dressed, for I had taken off nothing but my shoes.
I knew where to find in my drawers some linen, a locket, a ring.
In seeking these articles, I encountered the beads of a pearl necklace Mr. Rochester had forced me to accept a few days ago.
I left that. It was not mine. It was the visionary bride who had melted in air.
The other articles I made up in a parcel. My purse, containing twenty shillings, it was all I had, I put in my pocket.
I tied on my straw bonnet, pinned my shawl, took the parcel and my slippers, which I would not put on yet, and stole from my room.
Farewell, kind Mrs Fairfax, I whispered, as I glided past her door.
Farewell, my darling Adele, I said, as I glanced towards the nursery.
No thought could be admitted of entering to embrace her.
I had to deceive a fine ear, for, ought I knew, it might now be listening.
I would have got past Mr. Rochester's chamber without a pause, but my heart, momentarily stopping its speed at that threshold, my foot was forced to stop also.
No sleep was there. The inmate was walking restlessly from wall to wall, and again and again he sighed while I listened.
There was a heaven, a temporary heaven in this room for me if I chose.
I had but to go in and to say, Mr. Rochester, I will love you and live with you through life till death.
And a fount of rapture would spring to my lips. I thought of this.
That kind master, who could not sleep now, was waiting with impatience for day.
He would send for me in the morning. I should be gone. He would have me sought for, vainly.
He would feel himself forsaken, his love rejected, he would suffer, perhaps cruel desperate.
I thought of this, too. My hand moved towards the lock. I caught it back and glided on.
Drarily I wound my way downstairs. I knew what I had to do, and I did it mechanically.
I sought the key of the side door in the kitchen. I sought, too, a file of oil and a feather.
I hold the key and the lock. I got some water. I got some bread, for perhaps I should have to walk far.
And my strength, sorely shaken of late, must not break down. All this I did without one sound.
I opened the door, passed out, shut it softly. Dim dawn glimmered in the yard.
The great gates were closed and locked, but a wicket in one of them was only latched.
Through that I departed. It, too, I shut, and now I was out of Thornfield.
A mile off, beyond the field, lay a road which stretched in the contrary direction to Millcote.
A road I had never travelled, but often noticed and wanted where it led.
The other I bent my steps. No reflection was to be allowed now.
Not one glance was to be cast back, not even one forward.
Not one thought was to be given either to the past or the future.
The first was a page so heavenly sweet, so deadly sad, that to read one line of it would dissolve my courage and break down my energy.
The last was an awful blank, something like the world when the deluge was gone by.
I skirted fields and hedges and lanes till after sunrise. I believe it was a lovely summer morning.
I knew my shoes, which I had put on when I left the house, were soon wet with the dew.
But I looked neither to rising sun, nor smiling sky, nor wakening nature.
He who is taken out to pass through a fair scene to the scaffold, thinks not of the flowers that smile on his road, but of the block and axe edge,
of the deserviment of bone and vein, of the grave gaping at the end, and I thought of queer flight and homeless wandering.
And oh, with agony I thought of what I left.
I could not help it. I thought of him now, in his room, watching the sunrise, hoping I should soon come to say I would stay with him and be his.
I longed to be his. I pant to return. It was not too late. I could yet spare him the bitter pang of bereavement.
As yet my flight, I was sure, was undiscovered. I could go back and be his comforter, his pride, his redeemer from misery, perhaps from ruin.
Oh, that fear of his self-abandonment, far worse than my abandonment, how it goaded me.
It was a barbed arrowhead in my breast. It tore me when I tried to extract it. It sickened me when remembrance thrust it farther in.
Birds began singing in break and cobs. Birds were faithful to their mates. Birds were emblems of love.
What was I? In the midst of my pain of heart and frantic effort of principle, I abhorred myself.
I had no solace from self-approbation, none even from self-respect. I had injured, wounded, left my master. I was hateful in my own eyes.
Still I could not turn, nor retrace one step. God must have led me on.
As to my own will or conscience, impassioned grief had trampled one and stifled the other.
I was weeping widely as I walked along my solitary way. Fast, fast I went like one delirious.
A weakness, beginning inwardly, extending to my limbs, seized me and I fell.
I lay on the ground some minutes, pressing my face to the wet turf. I had some fear, or hope, that here I should die.
But I was soon up, crawling forwards on my hands and knees, and then again raised to my feet, as eager and as determined as ever to reach the road.
When I got there, I was forced to sit to rest me under the hedge. And while I sat, I heard wheels and saw a coach come on.
I stood up and lifted my hand. It stopped.
I asked where it was going. The driver named the place along way off, and where I was sure Mr. Rochester had no connections.
I asked for what sum he would take me there. He said thirty shillings. I answered I had but twenty.
Well, he would try to make it due. He further gave me leave to get into the inside, as the vehicle was empty.
I entered, was shut in, and it rolled on its way.
Gentle reader, may you never feel what I then felt. May your eyes never shed such stormy, scolding, heart-wrenching tears as poured from mine.
May you never appeal to heaven in prayers so hopeless and so agonized as in that hour left my lips. For never may you, like me, dread to be the instrument of evil to what you wholly love.
Two days have passed. It is a summer evening. The coachman has set me down at a place called White Cross. He could take me no farther for the sum I had given, and I was not possessed of another shilling in the world. The coach is a mile off by this time. I am alone.
At this moment I discover that I forgot to take my parcel out of the pocket of the coach, where I had placed it for safety. There it remains. There it must remain. And now I am absolutely destitute.
White Cross is no town, nor even a hamlet. It is but a stone pillar set up where four roads meet, whitewashed, I suppose, to be more obvious at a distance and in darkness. Four arms spring from its summit, the nearest town to which these point is, according to the inscription, distant ten miles, the farthest above twenty.
From the well-known names of these towns I learn in what county I have lighted. A North Midland Shire, dusk with moorland, rigid with mountain. This I see. There are great moors behind and on each hand of me. There are waves of mountains far beyond that deep valley at my feet.
The population here must be thin, and I see no passengers on these roads. They stretch out east, west, north and south-wide. Broad and lonely, they are all cut in the moor, and the heather grows deep and wild to their very verge.
Yet a chance traveller might pass by, and I wish no eye to see me now. Strangers would wonder what I am doing, lingering here at the signpost, evidently objectless and lost. I might be questioned, I could give no answer, but what would sound incredible and excite suspicion?
Not a tie holds me to human society at this moment. Not a charm or hope calls me where my fellow creatures are. None that saw me would have a kind thought or a good wish for me. I have no relative but the Universal Mother. Noture, I will seek her breast and ask repose.
I struck straight into the heath. I held onto a hollow I saw deeply, furrowing the brown moor side. I waded knee-deep in its dark growth. I turned with its turnings, and finding a moss-blackened granite crag in a hidden angle, I sat down under it. High banks of moor were about me. The crag protected my head. The sky was over that.
Some time passed before I felt tranquil even here. I had a vague dread that wild cattle might be near, or that some sportsman or poacher might discover me. If a gust of wind swept the waste, I looked up, fearing it was the rush of a bull.
If a plover whistled, I imagined it a man, finding my apprehensions unfounded, however, and calmed by the deep silence that rained as evening declined at nightfall.
I took confidence, as yet I had not thought. I had only listened, watched, dreaded. Now I regained the faculty of reflection. What was I to do? Where to go? Oh, intolerable questions, when I could do nothing and go nowhere, when a long way must yet be measured by my weary, trembling limbs before I could reach human habitation.
I had to be entreated before I could get a lodging, reluctant sympathy importuned. Almost certain repulse incurred before my tale could be listened to, or one of my wants relieved.
I touched the heath, it was dry, and yet warm with the beat of the summer day. I looked at the sky, it was pure, a kindly star twinkled just above the Chasm Ridge.
The dew fell, but with perpetuous softness. No breeze whispered. Nature seemed to me benign and good. I thought she loved me, outcast as I was, and I, who from man could anticipate only mistrust, rejection, insult, clung to her with filial fondness.
Tonight, at least, I would be her guest. As I was her child, my mother would lodge me without money and without price.
I had one morsel of bread yet, the remnant of a roll I had bought in a town we passed through at noon with a stray penny, my last coin.
I saw ripe bilberries gleaming here and there, like jet-beads in the heath. I gathered a handful and ate them with the bread.
My hunger, sharp before, was, if not satisfied, appeased by this hermit's meal.
I said my evening prayers at its conclusion, and then chose my couch.
Beside the crag, the heath was very deep. When I lay down, my feet were buried in it. Rising high on each side, it left only a narrow space for the night air to invade.
I folded my shawl double and spread it over me for a couplet. A low, mossy swell was my pillow.
Thus lodged, I was not, at least, at the commencement of the night cold.
My rest might have been blissful enough, only a sad heart broke it.
It plained of its gaping wounds, its inward bleeding, its writhing cords.
It trembled for Mr. Rochester and his doom. It bemoaned him with a bitter pity.
It demanded him with ceaseless longing, an impudent as a bird with both wings broken.
It still quivered at shattered pinions in vain attempts to seek him.
Worn out with this torture of thought, I rose to my knees.
Night was come, and her planets were risen, a safe, still night, too serene for the companionship of fear.
We know that God is everywhere, but certainly we feel his presence most when his works are on the grander scale spread before us.
And it is in the unclouded night sky, where his worlds wield their silent course, that we read clearest his infatude.
His omnipotence, his omnipresence, I had risen to my knees to pray for Mr. Rochester.
Looking up, I, with tear-dimmed eyes, saw the mighty Milky Way, remembering what it was, what countless systems there swept space like a soft trace of light.
I felt the might and strength of God.
Sure was I of his efficiency to save what he had made, convinced I grew that neither earth should perish, nor one of the souls it treasured.
I turned my prayer to thanksgiving, the source of life was also the saviour of spirits.
Mr. Rochester was safe, he was God's, and my God would he be guarded.
I again nestled to the breast of the hill, and erlong in sleep forgot sorrow.
But next day, want came to me pale and bare, long after the little birds had left their nests.
Long after bees had come in the sweet prime of day to gather the heath honey before the dew was dried.
When the long morning shadows were curtailed, and the sun filled earth and sky, I got up and I looked round me.
What a still, hot, perfect day, what a golden desert to spreading more.
Everywhere sunshine, I wished I could live in it and on it.
I saw a lizard run over the crag, I saw a bee busy among the sweet bilberries.
I would fain at the moment had become bee or lizard, and I might have found fitting nutriment, permanent shelter here.
But I was a human being, and had a human being's wants.
I must not linger where there was nothing to supply them.
I rose, I looked back at the bed I had left, hopeless of the future.
I wished but this, that my Maker had that night thought good to require my soul of me while I slept,
and that this weary frame, absolved by death from further conflict with fate,
had now but to decay quietly, and mingle in peace with the soil of this wilderness.
Life, however, was yet in my possession, with all its requirements, and pains, and responsibilities.
The burden must be carried, the want provided for, the suffering endured, the responsibility fulfilled, I set out.
White cross regained, I followed a road which led from the sun, now fervent and high.
By no other circumstance had I willed to decide my choice.
I walked a long time, and when I thought I had nearly done enough,
and might consciously yield to the fatigue that almost overpowered me,
might relax this forced action, and, sitting down on a stone I saw near,
submit resistlessly to the apathy that clogged heart and limb.
I heard a bell chime, a church bell.
I turned in the direction of the sound, and there, amongst the romantic hills,
whose changes and aspect I had ceased to note an hour ago, I saw a hamlet and a spire.
All the valley at my right hand was full of pasture fields, and cornfields, and wood,
and a glittering stream ran zigzag through the varied shades of green,
the mellowing grain, the sombre woodland, the clear and sunny leaf.
Recalled by the rumbling of wheels to the road before me,
I saw a heavily laden wagon laboring up the hill,
and not far beyond were two cows and their drover.
Human life and human labour were near.
I must struggle on, strive to live, and bend to toil like the rest.
About two o'clock p.m. I entered the village.
At the bottom of its one street there was a little shop with some cakes of bread in the window.
I covered it a cake of bread.
With that refreshment I could perhaps regain a degree of energy.
Without it, it would be difficult to proceed.
The wish to have some strength and some vigour returned to me as soon as I was amongst my fellow beings.
I felt it would be degrading to faint with hunger on the causeway of a hamlet.
Had I nothing about me I could offer in exchange for one of these rolls.
I considered I had a small silk handkerchief tied round my throat.
I had my gloves.
I could hardly tell how men and women in extremities of destitution proceeded.
I did not know whether either of these articles would be accepted.
Probably they would not, but I must try.
I entered the shop.
A woman was there, seeing a respectably dressed person, a lady as she supposed.
She came forward with civility.
How could she serve me?
I was seized with shame.
My tongue would not utter the request I had prepared.
I did not offer her the half-worn gloves, the creased handkerchief.
Besides, I felt it would be absurd.
I only begged permission to sit down a moment, as I was tired.
Disappointed in the expectation of a customer, she coolly acceded to my request.
She pointed to a seat.
I sunk into it.
I felt sorely urged to weep, but conscience how unreasonably such a manifestation would be.
I restrained it.
Soon I asked her if there were any dressmaker or plain workwoman in the village.
Yes, two or three, quite as many as there was employment for.
I reflected.
I was driven to the point now.
I was brought face to face with necessity.
I stood in the position of one without a resource, without a friend, without a coin.
I must do something.
What?
I must apply somewhere.
Where?
Did she know of any place in the neighbourhood where a servant was wanted?
Nah, she couldn't say.
What was the cheap trade in this place?
What did most of the people do?
Some were farm labourers.
A good deal worked at Mr Oliver's needle factory and at the foundry.
Did Mr Oliver employ women?
Nah, it was men's work.
And what did the women do?
I know it was the answer.
Some does one thing and some another.
Poor folk mungered on as they can.
She seemed to be tired of my questions and, indeed, what claim had I to importune her?
A neighbour or two came in.
My chair was evidently wanted.
I took leave.
I passed up the street, looking as I went at all the houses to the right hand and to
But I could discover no pretext, nor see an inducement to enter any.
I rambled round the hamlet, going sometimes to a little distance and returning again,
for an hour or more.
Much exhausted and suffering greatly now for want of food, I turned aside into a lane and
sat down under the hedge.
Er, many minutes had elapsed.
I was again on my feet, however, and again searching something, a resource, or at least
an informant.
A pretty little house stood at the top of the lane, with a garden before it, exquisitely
neat and brilliantly blooming.
I stopped at it.
What business had I to approach the white door or touch the glittering knocker?
In what way could it possibly be the interest of the inhabitants of that dwelling to serve
me?
Yet I drew near and knocked.
A mould-looking, cleanly attired young woman opened the door.
In such a voice as might be expected from a hopeless heart and fainting frame, a voice
wretchedly low and faltering, I asked if a servant was wanted here.
No, said she, we do not keep a servant.
Can you tell me where I could get employment of any kind?
I continued.
I am a stranger without acquaintance in this place.
I want some work, no matter what.
But it was not her business to think for me or to seek a place for me, besides, in her
eyes, how doubtful must have appeared my character.
Position.
Tale.
She shook her head.
She was sorry she could give me no information.
And the white door closed, quite gently and civilly, but it shut me out.
If she had held it open a little longer, I believe I should have begged a piece of bread,
for I was now brought low.
I could not bear to return to the sordid village, where, besides, no prospect of aid was visible.
I should have longed rather to deviate to a wood, I saw not far off, which appeared
in its thick shade to offer inviting shelter.
But I was so sick, so weak, so gnawed with nature's cravings, instinct kept me roaming
round abodes, where there was a chance of food.
Solitude would be no solitude.
Rest, no rest, while the vulture, hunger, thus sunk beak and talons in my side.
I drew new houses, I left them and came back again, and again I wandered away, always repelled
by the consciousness of having no claim to ask.
No right to expect interest in my isolated lot.
Meantime the afternoon advanced, while I thus wandered about like a lost and starving dog.
In crossing a field I saw the church spire before me.
I hastened towards it.
Near the churchyard and in the middle of a garden stood a well-built, though small house,
which I had no doubt was the parsonage.
I remembered that strangers who arrive at a place where they have no friends and who
want employment sometimes apply to the clergyman for introduction and aid.
It is the clergyman's function to help, at least with advice, those who wish to help
themselves.
I seemed to have something like a right to seek counsel here, renewing then my courage
and gathering my feeble remains of strength I pushed on.
I reached the house and knocked at the kitchen door.
An old woman opened.
I asked, was this the parsonage?
Yes.
Was the clergyman in?
No.
Would he be in soon?
No, he was gone from home.
To a distance?
Not so far.
He had been called away by the sudden death of his father.
He was at Marsh End now, and would very likely stay there a fortnight longer.
Was there any lady of the house?
No, there was naught but here, and she was housekeeper, and of her reader I could not
bear to ask the relief for want of which I was thinking.
I could not yet beg, and again I crawled away.
Once more I took off my handkerchief.
Once more I thought of the cakes of bread in the little shop.
Oh, for butter crust, for but one mouthful to allay the pang of famine.
Instinctively I turned my face again to the village.
I found the shop again, and I went in.
And though others were there besides the woman, I ventured the request.
Would she give me a roll for this handkerchief?
She looked at me with evident suspicion.
No, she never sold stuff either way.
Almost desperate I asked for half a cake.
She again refused.
How could she tell where I had got the handkerchief?
She said.
Would she take my gloves?
No.
What could she do with them?
Reader, it is not pleasant to dwell on these details.
Some say there is enjoyment in looking back to painful experience past.
But at this day I can scarcely bear to review the times to which I allude.
The moral degradation blent with the physical suffering,
form too distressing a recollection ever to be willingly dwelt on.
I blame none of these who repulse me.
I felt it was what was to be expected, and what could not be helped,
an ordinary beggar is frequently an object of suspicion,
a well-dressed beggar, inevitably so.
To be sure, what I begged was employment,
but whose business was it to provide me with employment?
Not certainly that of persons who saw me then for the first time,
and who knew nothing about my character,
and as to the woman who would not take my handkerchief
in exchange for her bread.
Why, she was right, if the offer appeared to her sinister
or the exchange unprofitable.
Let me condense now.
I am sick of the subject.
A little before dark I passed the farmhouse,
at the open door of which the farmer was sitting,
eating his supper of bread and cheese.
I stopped and said,
Will you give me a piece of bread, for I am very hungry.
He cast on me a glance of surprise,
but without answering he cut a thick slice from his loaf
and gave it to me.
I imagined he did not think I was a beggar,
but only an eccentric sort of lady,
who had taken a fancy to his brown loaf.
As soon as I was out of sight of his house,
I sat down and ate it.
I could not hope to get a lodging under a roof
and sort it in the wood I had been before alluded to.
But by night was wretched, my rest broken,
the ground was damp, the air cold.
Besides, intruders passed near me more than once,
and I had again and again to change my quarters.
No sense of safety or tranquillity befriended me.
Towards morning it rained,
the whole of the following day was wet.
Do not ask me, reader,
to give a minute account of that day.
As before I sought work,
as before I was repulsed,
as before I starved,
but once did food pass my lips.
At the door of a cottage
I saw a little girl about to throw a mess of cold porridge
into a pig trough.
Will you give me that? I asked.
She stared at me.
Mother, she exclaimed,
there is a woman wants me to give her these porridge.
Well, alas, replied a voice within,
give it her if she's a beggar.
The pig doesn't want it.
The girl emptied the stiffened mould into my hand
and I devoured it ravenously.
As the wet twilight deepened
I stopped in a solitary bridle path
which I had been pursuing an hour or more.
My strength is quite failing me,
I said in a solid look way.
I feel I cannot go much farther.
Shall I be an outcast again this night?
While the rain descends so,
must I lay my head on the cold drenched ground?
I fear I cannot do otherwise,
for who will receive me?
But it will be very dreadful
with this feeling of hunger,
faintness, chill
and this sense of desolation,
this total prostration of hope,
in all likelihood though I should die before morning.
And why cannot I reconcile myself to the prospect of death?
Why do I struggle to retain a valueless life?
Because I know or believe Mr Rochester is living
and then to die of want and cold is a fate
to which nature cannot submit passively.
O Providence, sustain me a little longer.
Aid, direct me.
My glazed eye wandered over the dim and misty landscape.
I saw I had strayed far from the village.
It was quite out of sight.
The very cultivation surrounding it had disappeared.
I had by crossways and by paths
once more drawn near the tract of Moorland
and now only a few fields,
almost as wild and unproductive as the heath
from which they were scarcely reclaimed,
lay between me and the dusky hill.
Well, I would rather die yonder than in a street
or on a frequented road.
I reflected.
And far better that crows and ravens,
if any ravens there be in these regions,
should pick my flesh from my bones
than that they should be prisoned in a workhouse coffin
and moulded in a pauper's grave.
To the hill then I turned.
I reached it.
It remained now only to find a hollow where I could lie down
and feel at least hidden, if not secure.
But all the surface of the waste looked level.
It showed no variation but a tint green,
where rush and moss overgrew the marshes,
black where the dry soil bore only heath,
dark as it was getting.
I could still see these changes,
though but as mere alternations of light and shade,
for colour had faded with the daylight.
My eyes still roved over the sullen swell
and along the moor edge.
Vanishing amidst the wildest scenery,
when on one dim point,
far in among the marshes and the ridges,
a light sprung up.
That is, an igneous aphatus,
was my first thought,
and I expected it would soon vanish.
It burnt on, however, quite steadily,
neither receding nor advancing.
Is it, then, a bonfire just kindled?
I questioned.
I watched to see whether it would spread,
but no, as it did not diminish,
so it did not enlarge.
It may be a candle in a house.
I then conjectured,
but if so, I can never reach it.
It is much too far away,
and were it within a yard of me,
what would it avail?
I should but knock at the door
to have it shut in my face.
And I sunk down where I stood
and hid my face against the ground.
I lay still awhile.
The night wind swept over the hill and over me
and died moaning in the distance.
The rain fell fast,
wetting me afresh to the skin.
Could I but had stiffened to the still frost,
the friendly numbness of death?
It might have pelted on.
I should not have felt it,
but my yet living flesh
shuddered at its chilling influence.
I rose ere long.
The light was yet there,
shining dim but constant through the rain.
I tried to walk again.
I dragged my exhausted limbs slowly towards it.
It led me a slant over the hill,
through a wide bog,
which would have been impassable in winter,
and was splashy and shaking even now,
in the height of summer.
Here I fell twice,
but as often as I rose and rallied my faculties,
this light was my forlorn hope.
I must gain it.
Having crossed the marsh,
I saw a trace of white over the moor.
I approached it.
It was a road or a track.
It led straight up to the light,
which now beamed from a sort of knoll,
amidst a clump of trees,
furs apparently,
from what I could distinguish
at the character of their forms
and foliage through the gloom.
My star vanished as I drew near.
Some obstacle had intervened
between me and it.
I put out my hand
to feel the dark mass before me.
I discriminated the rough stones
of a low wall.
Above it, something like palisades,
and within a high and prickly hedge.
I groped on.
Again a whitish object
gleamed before me.
It was a gate, a wicket.
It moved on its hinges
as I touched it.
On each side stood a sable bush holly,
or yew.
Entering the gate and passing the shrubs,
the silhouette of a house
rose to view, black, low,
and rather long.
But the guiding light shone nowhere.
Always obscurity.
Were the inmates retired to rest?
I fear it must be so.
In seeking the door,
I turned an angle.
There shot out the friendly gleam again,
from the lozenge panes
of a very small lattice window,
within a foot off the ground,
made still smaller
by the grove of ivy
or some other creeping plant,
whose leaves clustered thick
over the portion of the house wall
in which it was set.
The aperture was so screened and narrow
that curtain or shutter
had been deemed unnecessary.
And when I stooped down
and put aside the spray of foliage
shooting over it,
I could see all within.
I could see clearly a room
with a sanded floor,
clean scoured,
a dresser of walnut,
with pewter plates ranged in rows,
reflecting the redness and radiance
of a glowing peat fire.
I could see a clock,
a white deal table,
some chairs.
The candle, whose ray had been my beacon,
burnt on the table,
and by its light
an elderly woman,
somewhat rough looking,
but scrupulously clean,
like all about her,
was knitting a stocking.
I noticed these objects
coarsely only.
In them there was nothing extraordinary.
A group of more
interest appeared near the half.
Sitting still
amidst the rosy piece
and warmth suffusing it,
two young, graceful women,
ladies in every point,
sat, one in a low rocking chair,
the other on a lower stool,
both wore deep mourning
of crepe and bombazing.
Which sombre garb
singularly set off very fair necks
and faces.
A large old pointer dog
rested its massive head
on the knee of one girl.
In the lap of the other was cushioned
a black cat.
A strange place was this humble
kitchen for such occupants.
Who were they?
They could not be the daughters
of the elderly person at the table,
for she looked like a rustic,
and they were all delicacy
and cultivation.
I had nowhere seen such faces
as theirs.
And yet, as I gazed on them,
I seemed intimate with
every liniment.
I cannot call them handsome.
They were too pale and grey
for the word, as they each
bent over a book.
They looked thoughtful, almost
to severity.
A stand between them supported
a second candle and two great
volumes, to which they
frequently referred,
comparing them, seemingly
with the smaller books they held
in their hands.
Like people consulting a dictionary
to aid them in the task of
translation.
This scene was as silent as if
all the figures had been shadows
and the firelit apartment a picture.
So hushed was it.
I could hear the cinders
fall from the grate, the clock tick
in its obscure corner,
and I even fancied
I could distinguish the click-click
of the woman's knitting needles.
When, therefore,
a voice broke the strange
stillness at last,
it was audible enough to me.
Listen, Diana,
said one of the absorbed students.
France and old Daniel
are together in the night-time,
and France is telling a dream
from which he has awakened in terror.
Listen.
And in a low voice she read
something of which not one word
was intelligible to me.
For it was in an
unknown tongue, neither
French nor Latin.
Whether it was Greek or German,
I could not tell.
That is strong, she said,
when she had finished. I relish it.
The other girl, who
had lifted her head to listen to her
sister, repeated, while
she gazed at the fire,
a line of what had been read.
At a later day
I knew the language and the book.
Therefore, I will herequote
the line, though
when I first heard it, it was
only like a stroke on sounding
brass to me, conveying
no meaning.
The foot came forward
to tell how the star knocked.
Good, good,
she exclaimed,
while her dark and deep eyes
sparkled. There you have
a dim and mighty archangel
fitly set before you.
The line is worth a hundred
pages of Faustian.
I like it.
Both were again silent.
Is there only country where they
talk, eye that way,
us the old woman, looking up
from her knitting? Yes, Hannah,
a far larger country
than England, where they
talk in no other way.
Well, for sure case,
I know how they can understand
to one another.
And if either of you went there,
you could tell what they said, I guess.
We probably tell
something of what they said,
but not all, for we are not
as clever as you think us, Hannah.
We don't speak German,
and we cannot read it without a dictionary
to help us.
And what good does it do you?
We mean to teach it
sometime, or at least
their elements, as they say,
and then we shall get more money
than we do now.
Very like, but give over
studying, you've done enough for tonight.
I think we have,
at least I'm tired.
Mary, are you?
Mortally, after all, it's
tough work fagging away at a language
with no master
but a lexicon.
It is, especially such a language
as this crabbed but glorious
douche. I wonder
when St John will come home.
Surely he will not be
long now. It is just
ten. Looking at a little
gold watch, she drew from her
girdle. It rains
fast, Hannah. Will you have
the goodness to look at the fire
in the parlour?
The woman rose. She opened a door
through which I dimly saw
a passage. Soon
I heard her stir a fire
in an inner room.
She presently came back.
Ah, children, she
said. It fair troubles
me to go into yon room now.
It looks so lonesome
with the chair empty and set
back in a corner. She wiped
her eyes with her apron. The
two girls, grave before,
look sad now.
But he is in a better place,
continued Hannah. We shouldn't
wish him here again, and
then nobody need to have a quieter
death, nor he had.
You say he never mentioned
us, inquired one of the ladies.
He hadn't time,
Ben. He was gone in a minute.
Was your father?
He had been a bit ailing like
the day before, but not
to signify, and when Mr.
St. John asked if he would like
either of you to be sent for,
he fair laughed at him.
He began again
with a bit of heaviness in his head
the next day. That
is a fortnight sin,
and he went to sleep and never
wakened. He wore a moustache
when your brother went into
the chamber and fanned him.
Ah, children, that's
the last of the old stock.
For ye and Mr. St. John
is like of different sort.
To them is gone.
For all your mother wore Mitch
your way, and a most
a book learned. She willed
a picture, oh yea, Mary.
Diana is like
your father. I thought
them so similar I could not
tell where the old servant,
for such I now concluded her
to be, saw the difference.
Both were fair
complexioned and slenderly made,
both possessed
faces full of distinction
and intelligence.
One, to be sure, had hair
a shade darker than the other,
and there was a difference in their
style of wearing it. Mary's
pale brown locks were parted
and braided smooth.
Diana's duskier tresses
covered her neck with thick
curls. The clock struck
ten. You want your supper,
I am sure, observed Hannah,
and so will Mr. St. John
when he comes in.
And she proceeded to prepare
the meal. The ladies rose.
They seemed about to withdraw
to the parlour.
Till this moment I had been
so intent on watching them.
Their appearance and conversation
had excited in me so
keen an interest. I had
half forgotten my own
wretched position. Now it
occurred to me.
More desolate, more desperate
than ever, it seemed from
contrast. And how impossible
did it appear to touch the
inmates of this house with
concern on my behalf
to make them believe in the truth
of my wants and woes,
to induce them to vouch
safe a rest for my wanderings.
As I groped out the
door and knocked at it
hesitantly, I felt
that last idea to be a
mere chimera. Hannah
opened. What do you
want? She inquired,
in a voice of surprise, as she
surveyed me by the light of the
candle she held.
May I speak to your mistresses?
I said. You had
better tell me what you have to
say to them. Where do you come
from? I am a stranger.
What is your business
here at this hour?
I want a night's shelter
in an outhouse or anywhere
and a morsel of bread to
eat. Distrust,
the very feeling I dreaded,
appeared in Hannah's face.
I'll give you a piece of bread,
she said after a pause.
But we can't take in a
vagrant to lodge. It isn't
likely. Do let
me speak to your mistresses?
No, not I.
What can they do for you?
You should not be roving about
now. It looks very ill.
But where shall I go if you
drive me away? What shall I do?
Oh, I'll
warrant you know where to go
and what to do. Mind you
don't do wrong. That's all.
Here is a penny. Now go.
A penny cannot feed me
and I have no strength to go farther.
Don't shut the door.
Oh, don't. For God's sake.
I must. The rain is
driving in. Tell the young
ladies. Let me see them.
Indeed, I will not.
You are not what you ought to be
or you wouldn't make such a
noise. Move off.
But I must die if I am turned away.
Not you,
I'm feared. You have some ill planes
agate that bring you about
folks' houses at this time of night.
If you've any followers,
housebreakers or such
like, anywhere near,
you may tell them we are not
by ourselves in the house.
We have a gentleman and dogs
and guns. Here the
honest but inflexible servant
clapped the door to and
bolted it within.
This was the climax, a pang
of exquisite suffering,
a throw of true despair.
Rent and heave my heart.
Worn out indeed
I was. Not another step
could I stir.
I sunk on the wet
doorstep. I groaned.
I wrung my hands. I wept
in utter anguish.
Oh, this spectre of death.
Oh, this last hour
approaching in such horror.
Alas, this isolation,
this vanishment from my
kind. Not only the anchor
of hope but the footing of
fortitude was gone.
At least for a moment
but the last I soon endeavoured
to regain.
I can't but die, I said,
and I believe in God.
Let me try to wait his will
in silence.
These words I not only thought
but uttered, and
thrusting back all my misery
into my heart, I made an effort
to compel it to remain there,
dumb and still.
All men must die,
said a voice quite close at
hand, but all are not
condemned to meet lingering
and premature doom.
Such as yours would be
if you perished here of want.
Who or what speaks?
I asked, terrified,
at the unexpected sound
and, incapable now
of deriving from any
occurrence, a hope evade.
A form was near.
What form?
The pitch-dark night and my
enfeebled vision prevented me
from distinguishing.
With a loud, long knock,
the newcomer appealed to the door.
Is it you, Mr St John?
cried Hannah.
Yes, yes,
open, quickly.
Well, how wet and cold
you must be. Such a wild night
as it is. Come in,
your sisters are quite uneasy about
you, and I believe there are
bad folks about. There has
been a beggar-woman, I declare
she has not gone yet.
Lay down there, get up, for shame,
move up, I say.
Hush, Hannah,
I have a word to say to the woman.
You have done your duty
in excluding. Now let me do
mine in admitting her.
I was near and listened to both
you and her. I think
this is a peculiar case.
I must at least examine
into it. Young woman,
rise and pass before me
into the house.
With difficulty I obeyed
him. Presently I stood
within that clean, bright
kitchen, on the very half,
trembling, sickening,
conscience of an aspect
in the last degree ghastly,
wild and weather-beaten.
The two ladies, their
brother, Mr St John,
the old servant, were all gazing
at me. St John,
who is it? I heard
someone ask. I cannot
tell. I found her at the door
was the reply.
She does look white, said Hannah.
As white as clay or death
was responded.
She will fall, let her sit.
And indeed my head swum.
I dropped, but a chair
received me. I still
possessed my senses, though
just now I could not speak.
Perhaps a little water
would restore her, Hannah,
fetch some, but she is worn
to nothing, how very thin
and how very bloodless.
A mere spectre.
Is she ill or only
famished? Famished,
I think. Hannah, is that
milk? Give it to me and
a piece of bread. Diana,
I knew her by the long
curls, which I saw dripping
between me and the fire as
she bent over me,
broke some bread, dipped it in
the milk and put it to my lips.
Her face was near
mine. I saw there was pity
in it, and I felt sympathy
in her hurried breathing.
In her simple words, too,
the same balm like emotion
spoke. Try to eat?
Yes, try,
repeated Mary gently.
And Mary's hand removed
my sodden bonnet and lifted
my head. I tasted
what they offered me, feebly
at first, eagerly soon.
Not too much at
first. Restrain her, said the
brother. She has had enough
and he withdrew the cup of
milk and the plate of bread.
A little more, St. John.
Look at the avidity in
her eyes. No more
at present, sister. Try if
she can speak now. Ask her
her name. I felt
I could speak and I answered.
My name
is Joan Elliott.
Anxious as ever to avoid
discovery, I had before
resolved to assume an alias.
And where do you live?
Where are your friends?
I was silent.
Can we sing for anyone you know?
I shook my head.
What account can you give
of yourself?
Somehow, now that I had
once crossed the threshold of this
house, and once was brought
face to face with its owners,
I felt no longer outcast,
vagrant, and
disowned by the wide world.
I dared to put off the
mendicant, to resume
my natural manner and character.
I began once more
to know myself, and
when Mr. St. John demanded
an account, which at
present I was far too weak to
render, I said after
a brief pause,
Sir, I can give you
no details tonight.
But what then, said
he, do you expect me
to do for you?
Nothing, I replied. My
strength suffice for but short
answers. Diana took the
word. Do you mean,
she asked, that we have
now given you what age you
require, and that we may
dismiss you to the moor
and the rainy night?
I looked at her. She had,
I thought, a remarkable
countenance, instinct
both with power and goodness.
I took sudden
courage. Answering
her compassionate gaze with a
smile, I said,
I will trust you,
if I were a masterless and
stray dog. I know
that you would not turn me from
your hearth tonight,
as it is I really have no
fear. Do with me
and for me as you like,
but excuse me from much
discourse. My breath
is short. I feel a spasm
when I speak. All three
surveyed me, and all three
were silent.
Hannah, said Mr. St. John
at last, let her sit
there at present and ask her
no questions. In ten minutes
more, give her the remainder of
that milk and bread.
Mary and Diana let us
go into the parlour and talk
the matter over.
They withdrew. Very soon
one of the ladies returned.
I could not tell which.
A kind of pleasant stupor was
stealing over me as I sat
by the denial fire.
In an undertone
she gave some directions to
Hannah. Erlong,
with the servant's aid,
I contrived to mount a staircase,
my dripping clothes were removed.
Soon a warm,
dry bed received me.
I, thank God,
experienced amidst unutterable
exhaustion
a glow of grateful joy
and slept.
XXIX.
The recollection of about three days and nights succeeding this is very dim in my mind.
I can recall some sensations felt in that interval, but few thoughts framed and no actions
performed. I knew I was in a small room and in a narrow bed. To that bed I seemed to have grown.
I lay on it motionless as a stone, and to have torn me from it would have been almost to kill me.
I took no note of the lapse of time, of the change from morning to noon, from noon to evening.
I observed when anyone entered or left the apartment. I could even tell who they were.
I could understand what was said when the speaker stood near to me, but I could not answer. To open
my lips or move my limbs was equally impossible. Hannah, the servant, was my most frequent visitor.
Her coming disturbed me. I had a feeling that she wished me away, that she did not understand
me or my circumstances, that she was prejudiced against me. Diana and Mary appeared in the chamber
once or twice a day. They would whisper sentences of this sort at my bedside.
It is very well we took her in. Yes, she would certainly have been found dead at the door in
strange hardships, I imagine. Poor, emaciated, pallid wanderer.
She is not an uneducated person, I should think, by her manner of speaking. Her accent was quite
pure, and the clothes she took off, though splashed and wet, were little worn and fine.
She has a peculiar face, fleshlish and haggard as it is, I rather like it. And when in good health
and animated I can fancy her physiognomy would be agreeable. Never once in their dialogues did I
hear a syllable of regret at the hospitality they had extended to me, or of suspicion of,
or aversion to, myself. I was comforted. Mr. St. John came but once. He looked at me and said
my state of lethargy was the result of reaction from excessive and protracted fatigue. He
nature he was sure would manage best left to herself. He said every nerve had been
overstrained in some way, and the whole system must sleep torpid a while. There was no disease.
He imagined my recovery would be rapid enough when once commenced. These opinions he delivered
in a few words in a quiet low voice, and added after a pause in the tone of a man little accustomed
to expansive comment, rather an unusual physiognomy, certainly not indicative of vulgarity
or degradation. Far otherwise, responded Diana, to speak truth, St. John, my heart rather warms to
the poor little soul. I wish we may be able to benefit her permanently. That is hardly likely,
was the reply. You will find she is some young lady who has had a misunderstanding with her friends,
and has probably injudiciously left them. We may perhaps succeed in restoring her to them
if she is not obstinate, but I trace lines of force in her face which make me skeptical
of her tractability. He stood considering me some minutes, then added. She looks sensible,
but not at all handsome. She is so ill, St. John. Ill or well, she would always be plain.
The grace and harmony of beauty are quite wanting in those features.
On the third day I was better. On the fourth I could speak, move, rise, in bed, and turn.
Hannah had brought me some gruel and dry toast, about, as I suppose, the dinner hour.
I had eaten with relish. The food was good, void of the feverish flavor which had hitherto poisoned
what I had swallowed. When she left me I felt comparatively strong and revived.
Ere long satiety of repose and desire for action stirred me. I wished to rise, but what could I put
on? Only my damp and bemired apparel, in which I had slept on the ground and fallen in the marsh.
I felt ashamed to appear before my benefactor so clad. I was spared the humiliation. On the
bedside were all my own things, clean and dry. My black silk frock hung against the wall.
The traces of the bog were removed from it. The creases left by the wet smoothed out.
It was quite decent. My very shoes and stockings were purified and rendered presentable.
There were the means of washing in the room, and a comb and brush to smooth my hair.
After a weary process, and resting every five minutes, I succeeded in dressing myself.
My clothes hung loose on me, for I was much wasted, but I covered deficiencies with a shawl,
and once more clean and respectable looking. No speck of the dirt, no trace of the disorder
I so hated, and which seemed so to degrade me, left. I crept down a stone staircase with the
aid of the banisters, to a narrow low passage, and found my way presently to the kitchen.
It was full of the fragrance of new bread, and the warmth of a generous fire.
Hannah was baking. Prejudices, it is well known, are most difficult to eradicate from the heart
whose soil has never been loosened or fertilized by education. They grow there firm as weeds among
stones. Hannah had been cold and stiff indeed at the first. Latterly she had begun to relent a
and when she saw me come in tidy and well dressed, she even smiled.
What, you have got up, she said. You are better then. You may sit you down in my chair,
on the hearthstone, if you will. She pointed to the rocking chair. I took it. She bustled about,
examining me every now and then from the corner of her eye. Turning to me as she took some loaves
from the oven, she asked bluntly, Did you ever go a-begging afore you came here?
I was indignant for a moment, but remembering that anger was out of the question, and that I
had indeed appeared as a beggar to her, I answered quietly, but still not without a certain marked
firmness. You are mistaken in supposing me a beggar. I am no beggar, any more than yourself
or your young ladies. After a pause she said, I done it understand that. You've like no house,
nor no brass, I guess. The want of house or brass, by which I suppose you mean money,
does not make a beggar in your sense of the word. Are you book-learned? she inquired presently.
Yes, very. But you've never been to a boarding school? I was at a boarding school eight years.
She opened her eyes wide. Whatever cannot you keep yourself for then? I have kept myself,
and I trust shall keep myself again. What are you going to do with these gooseberries? I inquired,
as she brought out a basket of the fruit. Make them into pies. Give them to me, and I'll pick them.
Nay, I don't want you to do not. But I must do something. Let me have them. She consented,
and she even brought me a clean towel to spread over my dress, lest, she said, I should mucky it.
You've not been used to a servant's work, I see by your hands, she remarked. Happen you've been a dressmaker?
No, you are wrong. And now never mind what I have been. Don't trouble your head further about me.
But tell me the name of the house where we are. Some calls it Marsh End, and some calls it Moore
House. And the gentleman who lives here is called Mr. St. John? Nay, he doesn't live here. He is only
staying awhile. When he is at home, he is in his own parish at Morton. That village a few miles off?
Aye. And what is he? He is a parson. I remembered the answer of the old housekeeper at the parsonage
when I had asked to see the clergyman. This, then, was his father's residence? Aye. Old Mr.
John Rivers lived here, and his father and grandfather and great-grandfather afore him.
The name, then, of that gentleman is Mr. St. John Rivers? Aye, St. John is like his cursand name.
And his sisters are called Diana and Mary Rivers? Yes. Their father is dead?
Dead three weeks' sin of a stroke. They have no mother? The mistress has been dead this money a
year. Have you lived with the family long? I have lived here thirty years. I nursed them all
three. That proves you must have been an honest and faithful servant. I will say so much for you,
though you have had the incivility to call me a beggar. She again regarded me with a surprised
stare. I believe, she said, I was quite mistaken in my thoughts of you. But there are so many
cheats goes about. You must forgive me. And though I continued rather severely,
you wished to turn me from the door on a night when you should not have shut out a dog.
Well, it was hard. But what can a body do? I thought more of the children nor of myself.
Poor things! They have liked nobody to take care of them but me. I like to look sharpish.
I maintained a grave silence for some minutes.
You might not think too hardly of me, she again remarked.
But I do think hardly of you, I said, and I'll tell you why. Not so much because you refused to
give me shelter or regarded me as an impostor, as because you just now made it a species of
reproach that I had no brass and no house. Some of the best people that ever lived have been as
destitute as I am, and if you are a Christian you ought not to consider poverty a crime.
No more I ought, said she. Mr. St. John tells me so, too. And I see I wore wrong.
But I've clear, different notion on you now to what I had. You look a right down decent little
crater. That will do. I forgive you now. Shake hands. She put her flowery and horny hand into
mine. Another and heartier smile illumined her rough face, and from that moment we were friends.
Hannah was evidently fond of talking. While I picked the fruit and she made the paste for the
pies, she proceeded to give me sundry details about her deceased master and mistress,
and the children, as she called the young people. Old Mr. Rivers, she said, was a plain man enough,
but a gentleman, and of as ancient a family as could be found. Marsh End had belonged to
Rivers ever since it was a house, and it was, she affirmed, a bound two hundred year old,
for all it looked but a small humble place, not to compare with Mr. Oliver's grand hall
down in Morton Vale, but she could remember Bill Oliver's father a journeyman needle-maker,
and the Rivers were gentry in the old days of the Henrys, as anybody might see by looking
into the registers, in Morton Church vestry. Still, she allowed, the old master was like other folk,
not much out of the common way, stark mad a shooting and farming and suchlike. The mistress
was different. She was a great reader, and studied a deal, and the barons had taken after her.
There was nothing like them in these parts, nor ever had been. They had liked learning,
all three almost from the time they could speak, and they had always been of a meck of their own.
Mr. St. John, when he grew up, would go to college and be a parson, and the girls,
as soon as they left school, would seek places as governesses, for they had told their father
that some years ago lost a great deal of money by a man he had trusted turning bankrupt, and as he
was now not rich enough to give them fortunes, they must provide for themselves. They had lived
very little at home for a long while, and were only now come to stay a few weeks on account of
their father's death. But they did so like Marsh End and Morton, and all these moors and hills about.
They had been in London and many other grand towns, but they always said there was no place
like home. And then they were so agreeable with each other, never fell out nor threeped.
She did not know where there was such a family for being united.
Having finished my task of gooseberry picking, I asked where the two ladies and their brother were
now. Gone over to Morton for a walk, but they would be back in half an hour to tea.
They returned within the time Hannah had allotted them. They entered by the kitchen door. Mr. St.
John, when he saw me, merely bowed and passed through. The two ladies stopped. Mary, in a few
words, kindly and calmly expressing the pleasure she felt in seeing me well enough to be able to
come down. Diana took my hand. She shook her head at me.
You should have waited for my leave to descend, she said. You still look very pale, and so thin.
Poor child! Poor girl!
Diana had a voice toned to my ear like the cooing of a dove. She possessed eyes whose gaze I
delighted to encounter. Her whole face seemed to me full of charm. Mary's countenance was
equally intelligent, her features equally pretty, but her expression was more reserved,
and her manners, though gentle, more distant. Diana looked and spoke with a certain authority.
She had a will, evidently. It was my nature to feel pleasure in yielding to an authority
supported like hers, and to bend, where my conscience and self-respect permitted,
to an active will.
And what business have you here? she continued. It is not your place.
Mary and I sit in the kitchen sometimes, because at home we like to be free, even to license,
but you are a visitor and must go into the parlour.
I am very well here.
Not at all, with Hannah bustling about and covering you with flour.
Besides, the fire is too hot for you, interposed Mary.
To be sure, added her sister, come, you must be obedient. And still holding my hand,
she made me rise and led me into the inner room.
Sit there, she said, placing me on the sofa, while we take our things off and get the tea ready.
It is another privilege we exercise in our little moorland home, to prepare our own meals when we
are so inclined, or when Hannah is baking, brewing, washing, or ironing. She closed the
door, leaving me soulless with Mr. St. John, who sat opposite, a book or newspaper in his hand.
I examined first the parlour, and then its occupant.
The parlour was rather a small room, very plainly furnished, yet comfortable, because clean and
neat. The old-fashioned chairs were very bright, and the walnut wood table was like a looking glass.
A few strange antique portraits of the men and women of other days decorated the stained walls.
A cupboard with glass doors contained some books and an ancient set of china.
There was no superfluous ornament in the room, not one modern piece of furniture save a brace
of work-boxes and a lady's desk in rosewood which stood on a side table. Everything,
including the carpet and curtains, looked at once well worn and well saved.
Mr. St. John, sitting as still as one of the dusty pictures on the walls,
keeping his eyes fixed on the page he perused, and his lips mutely sealed, was easy enough to
examine. Had he been a statue instead of a man, he could not have been easier. He was young,
perhaps from twenty-eight to thirty, tall, slender. His face riveted the eye. It was like a
Greek face, very pure in outline, quite a straight, classic nose, quite an Athenian mouth and chin.
It is seldom, indeed, an English face come so near the antique models as did his. He might
well be a little shocked at the irregularity of my liniments, his own being so harmonious.
His eyes were large and blue, with brown lashes. His high forehead, colorless as ivory,
was partially streaked over by careless locks of fair hair.
This is a gentle delineation, is it not, reader? Yet he whom it describes scarcely impressed one
with the idea of a gentle, a yielding, an impressible, or even of a placid nature.
Quiescent as he now sat, there was something about his nostril, his mouth, his brow,
which to my perceptions indicated elements within either restless, or hard, or eager.
He did not speak to me one word, nor even direct to me one glance, till his sisters returned.
Diana, as she passed in and out, in the course of preparing tea, brought me a little cake,
baked on the top of the oven.
Eat that now, she said, you must be hungry. Hannah says you have had nothing but some
gruel since breakfast. I did not refuse it, for my appetite was awakened and keen.
Mr. Rivers now closed his book, approached the table, and as he took a seat fixed his
blue pictorial-looking eyes full on me. There was an unceremonious directness,
a searching, decided steadfastness in his gaze now, which told that intention,
and not diffidence, had hitherto kept it averted from the stranger.
You are very hungry, he said.
I am, sir. It is my way, it always was my way, by instinct, ever to meet the brief with brevity,
the direct with plainness. It is well for you that a low fever has forced you to abstain for
the last three days. There would have been danger in yielding to the cravings of your
appetite at first. Now you may eat, though still not immoderately.
I trust I shall not eat long at your expense, sir, was my very clumsily contrived, unpolished
answer. No, he said coolly, when you have indicated to us the residence of your friends,
we can write to them, and you may be restored to home. That, I must plainly tell you, is out of my
power to do, being absolutely without home and friends. The three looked at me, but not
trustfully. I felt there was no suspicion in their glances, there was more of curiosity.
I speak particularly of the young ladies. St. John's eyes, though clear enough in a literal
sense, in a figurative one were difficult to fathom. He seemed to use them rather as instruments to
search other people's thoughts, than as agents to reveal his own. The which combination of keenness
and reserve was considerably more calculated to embarrass than to encourage.
Do you mean to say, he asked, that you are completely isolated from every connection?
I do. Not a tie links me to any living thing. Not a claim do I possess to admittance under
any roof in England. A most singular position at your age. Here I saw his glance directed to my
hands, which were folded on the table before me. I wondered what he sought there. His words
soon explained the quest. You have never been married? You are a spinster? Diana laughed.
Why, she can't be above seventeen or eighteen years old, St. John, said she. I am near nineteen,
but I am not married. No. I felt a burning glow mount to my face, for bitter and agitating
recollections were awakened by the allusion to marriage. They all saw the embarrassment
and the emotion. Diana and Mary relieved me by turning their eyes elsewhere than to my crimsoned
visage. But the colder and sterner brother continued to gaze till the trouble he had
excited forced out tears as well as colour. Where did you last reside, he now asked?
You are too inquisitive, St. John, murmured Mary in a low voice, but he leaned over the
table and required an answer by a second firm and piercing look. The name of the place where
and of the person with whom I lived is my secret, I replied concisely. Which, if you like, you have,
in my opinion, a right to keep, both from St. John and every other questioner, remarked Diana.
Yet if I know nothing about you or your history, I cannot help you, he said. And you need help,
do you not? I need it, and I seek it so far, sir, that some true philanthropist will put me in the
way of getting work which I can do, and the remuneration for which will keep me, but if in
the barest necessities of life. I know not whether I am a true philanthropist, yet I am willing to
utmost of my power in a purpose so honest. First, then, tell me what you have been accustomed to do
and what you can do. I had now swallowed my tea. I was mightily refreshed by the beverage, as much
so as a giant with wine, it gave me new tone to my unstrung nerves, and it enabled me to address this
penetrating young judge steadily. Mr. Rivers, I said, turning to him, and looking at him as he
looked at me, openly and without diffidence, you and your sisters have done me a great service,
the greatest man can do to his fellow being. You have rescued me by your noble hospitality from
death. This benefit conferred gives you an unlimited claim on my gratitude, and a claim to a certain
extent on my confidence. I will tell you as much of the history of the wanderer you have harbored,
as I can tell, without compromising my own peace of mind, my own security,
moral and physical, and that of others. I am an orphan, the daughter of a clergyman.
My parents died before I could know them. I was brought up a dependent, educated in a charitable
institution. I will even tell you the name of the establishment, where I passed six years as a pupil
and two as a teacher, Lowood Orphan Asylum. You will have heard of it, Mr. Rivers.
The Reverend Robert Brocklehurst is the treasurer. I have heard of Mr. Brocklehurst,
and I have seen the school. I left Lowood nearly a year since to become a private governess.
I obtained a good situation and was happy. This place I was obliged to leave four days before I
came here. The reason of my departure I cannot and ought not to explain. It would be useless,
dangerous, and would sound incredible. No blame attached to me. I am as free from culpability
as any one of you three. Miserable I am and must be for a time, for the catastrophe which drove me
from a house I had found a paradise was of a strange and direful nature. I observed but two
points in planning my departure—speed, secrecy. To secure these I had to leave behind me everything
I possessed except a small parcel, which in my hurry and trouble of mind I forgot to take out of
the coach that brought me to Whitcross. To this neighbourhood then I came quite destitute. I slept
two nights in the open air and wandered about two days without crossing a threshold. But twice in
space of time did I taste food, and it was when brought by hunger, exhaustion, and despair almost
to the last gasp that you, Mr. Rivers, forbade me to perish of want at your door and took me under
the shelter of your roof. I know all your sisters have done for me, for I have not been insensible
during my seeming torpor, and I owe to their spontaneous, genuine, genial compassion as large
as your evangelical charity."
"'Don't make her talk any more now, St. John,' said Diana, as I paused.
"'She is evidently not yet fit for excitement. Come to the sofa and sit down, Miss Elliot.'
I gave an involuntary half-start at hearing the alias. I had forgotten my new name. Mr. Rivers,
whom nothing seemed to escape, noticed it at once.
"'You said your name was Jane Elliot,' he observed.
I did say so, and it is the name by which I think it expedient to be called at present,
but it is not my real name, and when I hear it, it sounds strange to me.
"'Your real name you will not give?'
No, I fear discovery above all things, and whatever disclosure would lead to it I avoid.'
"'You are quite right, I am sure,' said Diana.
"'Now do, brother, let her be at peace a while.'
But when St. John had mused a few moments, he recommended as imperturbably,
and with as much acumen as ever,
"'You would not like to be long dependent on our hospitality.
You would wish, I see, to dispense as soon as may be with my sister's compassion,
and above all with my charity. I am quite sensible of the distinction drawn,
nor do I resent it. It is just. You desire to be independent of us.'
I do. I have already said so. Show me how to work, or how to seek work. That is all I now ask.
Then let me go, if it be but to the meanest cottage. But till then, allow me to stay here.'
I dread another essay of the horrors of homeless destitution.
"'Indeed you shall stay here,' said Diana, putting her white hand on my head.
"'You shall,' repeated Mary, in the tone of undemonstrative sincerity which seemed natural to
her. "'My sisters, you see, have a pleasure in keeping you,' said Mr. St. John,
as they would have a pleasure in keeping and cherishing a half-frozen bird some wintry wind
might have driven through their casement. I feel more inclined to put you in the way of keeping
yourself, and shall endeavour to do so. But observe, my sphere is narrow. I am but the
homeless sort, and if you are inclined to despise the day of small things, seek some more efficient
sucker than such as I can offer.' "'She has already said that she is willing to do anything honest
she can do,' answered Diana for me. "'And you know, St. John, she has no choice of helpers.
She is forced to put up with such crusty people as you.'
"'I will be a dressmaker. I will be a plain workwoman. I will be a servant,
a nurse-girl, if I can be no better,' I answered.
"'Right,' said Mr. St. John quite coolly.
"'If such is your spirit, I promise to aid you in my own time and way.'
He now resumed the book with which he had been occupied before tea.
I soon withdrew, for I had talked as much and sat up as long as my present strength would permit.
The more I knew of the inmates of Morehouse, the better I liked them.
In a few days I had so far recovered my health that I could sit up all day and walk out sometimes.
I could join with Diana and Mary in all their occupations, converse with them as much as they wished,
and aid them when and where they would allow me.
There was a reviving pleasure in this intercourse, of a kind now tasted by me for the first time,
the pleasure arising from perfect congeniality of tastes, sentiments, and principles.
I liked to read what they liked to read. What they enjoyed delighted me.
What they approved I reverenced. They loved their sequestered home.
I, too, in the gray, small, antique structure, with its low roof, its lattice casements,
its moldering walls, its avenue of aged furs, all grown a slant under the stress of mountain winds,
its garden dark with yew and holly, and where no flowers but of the hardiest species would bloom,
found a charm both potent and permanent.
They clung to the purple moors behind and around their dwelling,
to the hollow vale into which the pebbly bridle path leading from their gate descended,
and which wound between fernbanks first and then amongst a few of the wildest little pasture fields
that ever bordered a wilderness of heath, or gave sustenance to a flock of gray moorland sheep,
with their little mossy-faced lambs. They clung to this scene, I say, with a perfect
enthusiasm of attachment. I could comprehend the feeling and share both its strength and truth.
I saw the fascination of the locality. I felt the consecration of its loneliness.
My eye feasted on the outline of swell and sweep, on the wild coloring communicated to ridge and
dell, by moss, by heathbell, by flower-sprinkled turf, by brilliant bracken and mellow granite
These details were just to me what they were to them, so many pure and sweet sources of pleasure.
The strong blast and the soft breeze, the rough and the halcyon day, the hours of sunrise and
sunset, the moonlight and the clouded night, developed for me in these regions the same
attraction as for them, wound round my faculties the same spell that entranced theirs.
Indoors we agreed equally well. They were both more accomplished and better read than I was,
but with eagerness I followed in the path of knowledge they had trodden before me.
I devoured the books they lent me. Then it was full satisfaction to discuss with them in the
evening what I had perused during the day. Thought fitted thought, opinion met opinion,
we coincided, in short, perfectly.
If in our trio there was a superior and a leader it was Diana. Physically she far excelled me,
she was handsome, she was vigorous. In her animal spirits there was an affluence of life
and certainty of flow, such as excited my wonder, while it baffled my comprehension.
I could talk a while when the evening commenced, but the first gush of vivacity and fluency gone,
I was feigned to sit on a stool at Diana's feet, to rest my head on her knee, and listen alternately
to her and Mary, while they sounded thoroughly the topic on which I had but touched. Diana offered
to teach me German. I liked to learn of her. I saw the part of instructress pleased and suited her,
that of scholar pleased and suited me no less. Our natures dovetailed mutual affection of the
strongest kind was the result. They discovered I could draw. Their pencils and color boxes were
immediately at my service. My skill, greater in this one point than theirs, surprised and charmed
them. Mary would sit and watch me by the hour together. Then she would take lessons, and a
docile, intelligent, assiduous pupil she made. Thus occupied and mutually entertained, days passed
like hours, and weeks like days. As to Mr. St. John, the intimacy which had arisen so naturally
and rapidly between me and his sisters did not extend to him. One reason of the distance yet
observed between us was that he was comparatively seldom at home. A large proportion of his time
appeared devoted to visiting the sick and poor among the scattered population of his parish.
No weather seemed to hinder him in these pastoral excursions. Rain or fair he would,
when his hours of morning study were over, take his hat and, followed by his father's old pointer,
Carlo, go out on his mission of love or duty. I scarcely know in which light he regarded it.
Sometimes, when the day was very unfavorable, his sisters would expostulate. He would then
with a peculiar smile, more solemn than cheerful. And if I let a gust of wind or a sprinkling of
rain turn me aside from these easy tasks, what preparation would such sloth be for the future,
I proposed to myself? Diana and Mary's general answer to this question was a sigh,
and some minutes of apparently mournful meditation. But besides his frequent absences,
there was another barrier to friendship with him. He seemed of a reserved and abstracted
and even of a brooding nature. Zealous in his ministerial labors, blameless in his life and
habits, he yet did not appear to enjoy that mental serenity, that inward content, which should be the
reward of every sincere Christian and practical philanthropist. Often of an evening, when he sat
the window, his desk and papers before him, he would cease reading or writing, rest his chin on
his hand, and deliver himself up to I know not what course of thought, but that it was perturbed,
and exciting might be seen in the frequent flash and changeful dilation of his eye.
I think, moreover, that nature was not to him that treasury of delight that it was to his sisters.
He expressed once, and but once in my hearing, a strong sense of the rugged charm of the hills,
and an inborn affection for the dark roof and hoary walls he called his home. But there was more
of gloom than pleasure in the tone and words in which the sentiment was manifested, and never did
he seem to roam the moors for the sake of their soothing silence, never seek out or dwell upon the
thousand peaceful delights they could yield. Incommunicative as he was, some time elapsed
before I had an opportunity of gauging his mind. I first got an idea of its caliber when I heard
him preach in his own church, at Morton. I wish I could describe that sermon, but it is past my
power. I cannot even render faithfully the effect it produced on me. It began calm, and indeed,
as far as delivery and pitch of voice went, it was calm to the end. An earnestly felt,
yet strictly restrained zeal, breathed soon in the distant accents, and prompted the nervous
language. This grew to force, compressed, condensed, controlled. The heart was thrilled,
the mind astonished by the power of the preacher, neither was softened. Throughout there was a
doctrine, election, predestination, reprobation were frequent, and each reference to these points
sounded like a sentence pronounced for doom. When he had done, instead of feeling better, calmer,
more enlightened by his discourse, I experienced an inexpressible sadness, for it seemed to me,
I know not whether equally so to others, that the eloquence to which I had been listening
had sprung from a depth where lay turbid dregs of disappointment, where move troubling impulses
of insatiate yearnings and disquieting aspirations. I was sure St. John Rivers, pure-lived,
conscientious, zealous as he was, had not yet found that peace of God which passeth all understanding.
He had no more found it, I thought, than had I. With my concealed and wrecking regrets for my
broken idol and lost Elysium, regrets to which I have latterly avoided referring,
but which possessed me and tyrannized over me ruthlessly. Meantime a month was gone,
Diana and Mary were soon to leave Morehouse, and return to the far different life and scene
which awaited them, as governesses in a large fashionable south of England city,
where each held a situation in families by whose wealthy and haughty members they were regarded
only as humble dependents, and who neither knew nor sought one of their innate excellences,
and appreciated only their acquired accomplishments, as they appreciated the skill of their cook,
or the taste of their waiting-woman. Mr. St. John had said nothing to me yet about the employment
he had promised to obtain for me, yet it became urgent that I should have a vocation of some kind.
One morning, being left alone with him a few minutes in the parlour, I ventured to
approach the window recess, which his table, chair, and desk consecrated as a kind of study,
and I was going to speak, though not very well knowing in what words to frame my inquiry,
for it is at all times difficult to break the ice of reserve glassing over such natures as his,
when he saved me the trouble by being the first to commence a dialogue.
Looking at me as I drew near, you have a question to ask of me, he said?
Yes, I wish to know whether you have heard of any service I can offer myself to undertake.
I found or devised something for you three weeks ago, but as you seemed both useful and happy here,
as my sisters had evidently become attached to you, and your society gave them unusual pleasure,
I deemed it inexpedient to break in on your mutual comfort, till their approaching departure
should render yours necessary.
And they will go in three days now, I said.
Yes, and when they go, I shall return to the parsonage at Morton.
Hannah will accompany me, and this old house will be shut up.
I waited a few moments, expecting he would go on with the subject first broached,
but he seemed to have entered another train of reflection.
His look denoted abstraction from me and my business.
I was obliged to recall him to a theme which was of necessity,
one of close and anxious interest to me.
What is the employment you had in view, Mr. Rivers?
I hope this delay will not have increased the difficulty of securing it.
Oh no, since it is an employment which depends only on me to give and you to accept.
He again paused. There seemed a reluctance to continue.
I grew impatient. A restless movement or two and an eager and exacting glance fastened on his face
conveyed the feeling to him as effectually as words could have done, and with less trouble.
You need be in no hurry to hear, he said. Let me frankly tell you,
I have nothing eligible or profitable to suggest. Before I explain, recall, if you please,
my notice clearly given that if I helped you it must be as the blind man would help the lame.
I am poor, for I find that when I have paid my father's debts,
all the patrimony remaining to me will be this crumbling grange, the row of scathed firs behind,
and the patch of moorish soil with the yew trees and holly bushes in front. I am obscure.
Rivers is an old name, but of the three sole descendants of the race,
two earn the dependence crust among strangers, and the third considers himself an alien from
his native country, not only for life but in death. Yes, and deems and is bound to deem himself
honoured by the lot, and aspires but after the day when the cross of separation from fleshly ties
shall be laid on his shoulders, and when the head of that church militant, of whose humblest
members he is one, shall give the word, rise, follow me. Syngin said these words as he pronounced
his sermons, with a quiet deep voice, with an unflushed cheek, and a coruscating radiance of
glance. He resumed. And since I am myself poor and obscure, I can offer you but a service of poverty
and obscurity. You may even think it degrading, for I see now your habits have been what the
world calls refined, your tastes lean to the ideal, and your society has at least been amongst the
educated. But I consider that no service degrades which can better our race. I hold that the more
arid and unreclaimed the soil where the Christian labourer's task of tillage is appointed him,
the scantier the mead his toil brings, the higher the honour. His, under such circumstances,
is the destiny of the pioneer, and the first pioneers of the gospel were the apostles,
their captain was Jesus, the Redeemer himself.
Well, I said, as he again paused, proceed. He looked at me before he proceeded. Indeed,
he seemed leisurely to read my face, as if its features and lines were characters on a page,
the conclusions drawn from the scrutiny he partially expressed in his succeeding observations.
I believe you will accept the post I offer you, said he, and hold it for a while, not permanently,
though, any more than I could permanently keep the narrow and narrowing, the tranquil hidden office
of English country incumbent, for in your nature is an alloy as detrimental to repose as that in mine,
though of a different kind. Do explain, I urged, while he halted once again.
I will, and you shall hear how poor the proposal is, how trivial, how cramping. I shall not stay
long at Morton, now that my father is dead, and that I am my own master. I shall leave the place,
probably in the course of a twelve month, but while I do stay, I will exert myself to the utmost for
its improvement. Morton, when I came to it two years ago, had no school. The children of the
one for boys, I mean now to open a second school for girls. I have hired a building for the purpose
with a cottage of two rooms attached to it for the mistress's house. Her salary will be thirty
pounds a year. Her house is already furnished, very simply, but sufficiently, by the kindness
of a lady, Miss Oliver, the only daughter of the sole rich man in my parish, Mr. Oliver,
the proprietor of a needle factory and iron foundry in the valley. The same lady pays for
the education and clothing of an orphan from the workhouse, on condition that she shall aid the
mistress in such menial offices connected with her own house and the school, as her occupation
of teaching will prevent her having time to discharge in person. Will you be this mistress?
He put the question rather hurriedly. He seemed half to expect an indignant, or at least a
disdainful rejection of the offer, not knowing all my thoughts and feelings, though guessing some,
he could not tell in what light the lot would appear to me. In truth it was humble, but then
it was sheltered and I wanted a safe asylum. It was plodding, but then, compared with that of
a governess in a rich house, it was independent. And the fear of servitude with strangers entered
my soul like iron. It was not ignoble, not unworthy, not mentally degrading. I made my
decision. I thank you for the proposal, Mr. Rivers, and I accept it with all my heart.
But you comprehend me, he said. It is a village school. Your scholars will be only poor girls,
cottagers' children at the best, farmers' daughters. Knitting, sewing, reading, writing,
ciphering will be all you will have to teach. What will you do with your accomplishments?
What with the largest portion of your mind, sentiments, tastes?
Save them till they are wanted. They will keep. You know what you undertake, then? I do.
He now smiled, not a bitter or a sad smile, but one well pleased and deeply gratified.
And when will you commence the exercise of your function?
I will go to my house tomorrow, and open the school, if you like, next week.
Very well, so be it. He rose and walked through the room. Standing still, he again looked at me.
He shook his head. What do you disapprove of, Mr. Rivers, I asked. You will not stay at Morton
No, no. Why? What is your reason for saying so? I read it in your eye. It is not of that description
which promises the maintenance of an even tenor in life. I am not ambitious.
He started at the word ambitious. He repeated. No. What made you think of ambition? Who is
I know I am. But how did you find it out? I was speaking of myself.
Well, if you are not ambitious, you are. He paused. What? I was going to say impassioned,
but perhaps you would have misunderstood the word and been displeased. I mean that human
affections and sympathies have a most powerful hold on you. I am sure you cannot long be content
to pass your leisure and solitude, and to devote your working hours to a monotonous labor
wholly void of stimulus. Any more than I can be content, he added with emphasis.
To live here buried in morass, pent in with mountain, my nature that God gave me contravened,
my faculties heaven-bestowed, paralyzed, made useless. You hear now how I contradict myself,
I who preached contentment with a humble lot, and justified the vocations even of
wood and drawers of water in God's service. I, his ordained minister, almost rave in my restlessness.
Well, propensities and principles must be reconciled by some means.
He left the room. In this brief hour I had learned more of him than in the whole previous month,
yet still he puzzled me. Diana and Mary Rivers became more sad and silent as the day approached
leaving their brother in their home. They both tried to appear as usual, but the sorrow they
had to struggle against was one that could not be entirely conquered or concealed. Diana intimated
that this would be a different parting from any they had ever yet known. It would probably,
as far as St. John was concerned, be a parting for years. It might be a parting for life.
He will sacrifice all to his long-framed resolves, she said. Natural affection and feelings more
potent still. St. John looks quiet, Jane, but he hides a fever in his vitals. You would think him
gentle. Yet in some things he is inexorable as death, and the worst of it is my conscience will
hardly permit me to dissuade him from his severe decision. Certainly I cannot for a moment blame
him for it. It is right, noble, Christian, yet it breaks my heart. And the tears gushed to her
fine eyes. Mary bent her head low over her work. We are now without father, we shall soon be without
home and brother, she murmured. At that moment a little accident supervened which seemed decreed
by fate, purposely to prove the truth of the adage that misfortunes never come singly,
and to add to their distresses the vexing one of the slip between the cup and the lip.
St. John passed the window reading a letter. He entered.
Our uncle John is dead, said he. Both the sisters seemed struck, not shocked or appalled.
The tidings appeared in their eyes rather momentous than afflicting.
Dead, repeated Diana. Yes. She riveted a searching gaze on her brother's face,
and what then, she demanded in a low voice. What then die, he replied, maintaining a marble
immobility of feature. What then? Why, nothing. Read. He threw the letter into her lap. She
glanced over it and handed it to Mary. Mary perused it in silence and returned it to her brother.
All three looked at each other and all three smiled, a dreary pensive smile enough.
Amen. We can yet live, said Diana at last.
At any rate, it makes us no worse off than we were before, remarked Mary.
Only it forces rather strongly on the mind the picture of what might have been, said Mr. Rivers,
and contrasts it somewhat too vividly with what is.
He folded the letter and locked it in his desk, and again went out.
For some minutes no one spoke. Diana then turned to me.
Jane, you will wonder at us and our mysteries, she said, and think us hard-hearted beings not
to be more moved at the death of so near a relation as an uncle, but we have never seen
him or known him. He was my mother's brother. My father and he quarrelled long ago. It was
by his advice that my father risked most of his property in the speculation that ruined him.
Mutual recrimination passed between them. They parted in anger and were never reconciled.
My uncle engaged afterwards in more prosperous undertakings. It appears he realized a fortune of
twenty thousand pounds. He was never married and had no near kindred but ourselves, and one other
person, not more closely related than we. My father always cherished the idea that he would
atone for his error by leaving his possessions to us. That letter informs us that he has bequeathed
every penny to the other relation, with the exception of thirty guineas, to be divided
between St. John, Diana, and Mary Rivers, for the purchase of three mourning rings. He had a right,
of course, to do as he pleased, and yet a momentary damp is cast on the spirits by the receipt of such
news. Mary and I would have esteemed ourself rich with a thousand pounds each, and to St. John such
sum would have been valuable, for the good it would have enabled him to do.
This explanation given the subject was dropped, and no further reference made to it, by either
Mr. Rivers or his sisters. The next day I left Marsh End for Morton. The day after, Diana and
Mary quitted it for distant be. In a week Mr. Rivers and Hannah repaired to the parsonage,
and so the old grange was abandoned.
My home, then, when I at last find a home, is a cottage, a little room with white-washed
walls and a sanded floor, containing four painted chairs and a table, a clock, a cupboard,
with two or three plates and dishes, and a set of teethings in delft. Above, a chamber
of the same dimensions as the kitchen, with a deal bedstead, and chest of drawers, small,
yet too large to be filled with my scanty wardrobe, though the kindness of my gentle
and generous friends has increased that by a modest stock of such things as are necessary.
It is evening. I have dismissed, with the fee of an orange, the little orphan who serves
as a handmaid. I am sitting alone on the hearth. This morning the village school opened. I
had twenty scholars, but three of the number can read, none write or cipher, several knit,
and a few sew a little. They speak with the broadest accent of the district. At present
they and I have a difficulty in understanding each other's language. Some of them are unmannered,
rough, intractable, as well as ignorant, but others are docile, have a wish to learn, and
a disposition that pleases me. I must not forget that these coarsely clad little peasants
are of flesh and blood as good as the scions of gentlest genealogy, and that the germs
of native excellence, refinement, intelligence, kind feeling, are as likely to exist in their
hearts as in those of the best born. My duty will be to develop these germs. Surely I shall
some happiness in discharging that office. Much enjoyment I do not expect in the life
opening before me, yet it will, doubtless, if I regulate my mind, and exert my powers
as I ought, yield me enough to live on from day to day. Was I very gleeful, settled, content,
during the hours I passed in yonder bare, humble classroom this morning and afternoon?
Not to deceive myself, I must reply, no. I felt desolate to a degree. I felt, yes, idiot
that I am. I felt degraded. I doubted I had taken a step which sank instead of rising
me in the scale of social existence. I was weakly dismayed at the ignorance, the poverty,
the coarseness of all I heard and saw round me. But let me not hate and despise myself
too much for these feelings. I know them to be wrong. That is a great step gained. I shall
strive to overcome them. To-morrow, I trust, I shall get the better of them partially,
and in a few weeks, perhaps, they will be quite subdued. In a few months, it is possible
the happiness of seeing progress, and a change for the better in my scholars, may substitute
gratification for disgust.
Meantime, let me ask myself one question. Which is better? To have surrendered to temptation,
listened to passion, made no painful effort, no struggle, but to have sunk down in the
silken snare, fallen asleep on the flowers covering it, wakening in a southern clime
amongst the luxuries of a pleasure villa, to have been now living in France, Mr. Rochester's
mistress, delirious with his love half my time, for he would, oh yes, he would have
loved me well for a while. He did love me. No one will ever love me so again. I shall
never more know the sweet homage given to beauty, youth, and grace, for never to anyone
else shall I seem to possess these charms. He was fond and proud of me. It is what no
man besides will ever be.
But where am I wandering, and what am I saying, and above all feeling? Whether is it better,
I ask, to be a slave to a fool's paradise at Marseilles, fevered with delusive bliss
one hour, suffocating with the bitterest tears of remorse and shame the next? Or to be a
village a school mistress, free and honest, in a breezy mountain nook in the healthy heart
of England? Yes, I feel now that I was right when I adhered to principle and law, and scorned
and crushed the insane promptings of a frenzied moment. God directed me to a correct choice.
I thank his providence for the guidance. Having brought my eventide musings to this point,
I rose, went to my door, and looked at the sunset of the harvest day, and at the quiet
fields before my cottage, which, with the school, was distant half a mile from the village.
The birds were singing their last strains. The air was mild and dew was balm. While I
looked, I thought myself happy, and was surprised to find myself air-long weeping. And why?
For the doom which had roughed me from adhesion to my master, for him I was no more to see.
For the desperate grief and fatal fury, consequences of my departure, which might now, perhaps,
be dragging him from the path of right, too far to leave hope of ultimate restoration
thither. At this thought, I turned my face aside from the lovely sky of Eve and lonely
vale of Morton. I say lonely, for in that bend of it, visible to me, there was no building
apparent, save the church and the parsonage, half hidden trees, and, quite at the extremity,
the roof of Vale Hall, where the rich Mr. Oliver and his daughter lived. I hid my eyes,
and linked my head against the stone frame of my door. But soon a slight noise near the
wicket which, shut in my tiny garden from the meadow beyond, it made me look up. A dog,
old Carlo, Mr. Rivers's pointer, as I saw in a moment, was pushing the gate with his
nose, and St. John himself leaned upon it with folded arms. His brow knit, his gaze
grave almost to displeasure fixed on me. I asked him to come in.
No, I cannot stay. I have only brought you a little parcel my sister's left for you.
I think it contains a color box, pencils, and paper. I approached to take it. A welcome
gift it was. He examined my face, I thought, with austerity as I came near. The traces
of tears were doubtless very visible upon it.
Have you found your first day's work harder than you expected? he asked.
Oh, no, on the contrary. I think in time I shall get on with my scholars very well. But
perhaps your accommodations, your cottage, your furniture, have disappointed your expectations.
They are, in truth, scanty enough, but—
I interrupted. My cottage is clean and weatherproof, my furniture sufficient and commodious. All
I see has made me thankful, not despondent. I am not absolutely such a fool and sensualist
as to regret the absence of a carpet, a sofa, and silver plate. Besides, five weeks ago
I had nothing. I was an outcast, a beggar, a vagrant. Now I have acquaintance, a home,
a business. I wonder at the goodness of God, the generosity of my friends, the bounty of
my lot. I do not repine. But you feel solitude and oppression? The little house there behind
you is dark and empty. I have hardly had time yet to enjoy a sense of tranquillity, much
less to grow impatient under one of loneliness.
Very well. I hope you feel the content you express. At any rate, your good sense will
tell you that it is too soon yet to yield to the vacillating fears of Lot's wife. What
you had left before I saw you, of course, I do not know. But I counsel you to resist
firmly every temptation which would incline you to look back. Pursue your present career
steadily—for some months, at least.
It is what I mean to do, I answered. St. John continued. It is hard work to control the
workings of inclination and turn the bent of nature, but that it may be done I know
from experience. God has given us, in a measure, the power to make our own fate, and when our
energies seem to demand a sustenance they cannot get, when our will strains after a
path we may not follow, we need neither starve from inanation nor stand still in despair.
We have but to seek another nourishment for the mind, as strong as the forbidden food
it longed to taste, and perhaps purer, and to hew out for the adventurous foot a road
as direct and broad as the one fortune has blocked up against us, if rougher than it.
A year ago I was myself intensely miserable, because I thought I had made a mistake in
entering the ministry. Its uniform duties wearied me to death. I burnt for the more
active life of the world, for the more exciting toils of a literary career, for the destiny
of an artist, author, orator, something rather than that of a priest, yes, the heart of a
politician, of a soldier, of a votary of glory, a lover of renown, a luster after power beat
under my curate surplus. I considered. My life was so wretched it must be changed or
die. After a season of darkness and struggling, light broke and relief fell. My cramped existence
all at once spread out to a plain without bounds. My powers heard a call from heaven to rise,
gather their full strength, spread their wings, and mount beyond ken. God has an errand for me,
to bear which afar, to deliver it well, skill and strength, courage and eloquence, the best
qualifications of soldier, statesman and orator were all needed. For these all center in the good
missionary. A missionary I resolved to be. From that moment my state of mind changed,
the fetters dissolved and dropped from every faculty, leaving nothing of bondage but its
galling soreness, which time can only heal. My father, indeed, imposed the determination,
but since his death I have not a legitimate obstacle to contend with. Some affairs settled,
a successor for Morton provided, an entanglement or two of the feelings broken through or cut
asunder, a last conflict with human weakness, in which I know I shall overcome, because I have
vowed that I will overcome. And I leave Europe for the East. He said this in his peculiar subdued,
yet emphatic voice, looking when he had ceased speaking not at me, but at the setting sun,
at which I looked, too. Both he and I had our backs towards the path, leading up the
field to the wicket. We had heard no step on that grass-grown track. The water running in
the vale was the one lulling sound of the hour and scene. We might well then start when a gay
voice, sweet as a silver bell, exclaimed, Good evening, Mr. Rivers. And good evening, old Carlo.
Your dog is quicker to recognize his friends than you are, sir. He pricked his ears and
wagged his tail when I was at the bottom of the field. And you have your back towards me now.
It was true. Though Mr. Rivers had started at the first of those musical accents,
as if a thunderbolt had split a cloud over his head, he stood yet, at the close of the sentence,
in the same attitude in which the speaker had surprised him. His arm resting on the gate,
his face directed towards the West. He turned at last with measured deliberation. A vision,
as it seemed to me, had risen at his side. There appeared, within three feet of him,
a form clad in pure white, a youthful graceful form, full yet fine in contour, and when,
after bending to caress Carlo, it lifted up its head and threw back a long veil,
there bloomed under his glance a face of perfect beauty. Perfect beauty is a strong expression,
but I do not retrace or qualify it. As sweet features as ever the temperate clime of Albion
moulded, as pure hues of rose and lily as ever her humid gales and vapoury skies generated and
screened justified in this instance the term, no charm was wanting, no defect was perceptible.
The young girl had regular and delicate lineaments, eyes shaped and coloured as we see them in lovely
pictures, large and dark and full, the long and shadowy eyelash which encircles a fine eye
with so soft a fascination, the penciled brow which gives such clearness, the white smooth forehead
which adds such repose to the livelier beauties of tint and ray, the cheek oval fresh and smooth,
the lips fresh too, ruddy, healthy, sweetly formed, the even and gleaming teeth without flaw,
the small dimpled chin, the ornament of rich plenteous tresses, all advantages, in short,
which, combined, realised the ideal of beauty were fully hers. I wondered as I looked at this
fair creature, I admired her with my whole heart. Nature had surely formed her in a partial mood,
and forgetting her usual stinted stepmother, Dole of Gifts, had endowed this, her darling,
with a grand dame's bounty. What did St. John Rivers think of this earthly angel?
I naturally asked myself that question as I saw him turn to her and look at her,
and as naturally I sought the answer to the inquiry in his countenance. He had already
withdrawn his eye from the parry, and was looking at a humble tuft of daisies which grew by the
wicket. A lovely evening, but late for you to be out alone, he said, as he crushed the snowy heads
of the closed flowers with his foot. Oh, I only come home from S. She mentioned the name of a large
town, some twenty miles distant, this afternoon. Papa told me you had opened your school, and that
the new mistress was come, and so I put on my bonnet after tea, and ran up the valley to see her.
This is she, pointing to me. It is, said St. John. Do you think you shall like Morton?
She asked of me, with a direct and naïve simplicity of tone and manner,
pleasing, if childlike. I hope I shall. I have many inducements to do so.
Did you find your scholars as attentive as you expected?
Quite. Do you like your house?
Very much. Have I furnished it nicely?
Very nicely, indeed. And made a good choice of an attendant for you in Alice Wood?
You have, indeed. She is teachable and handy.
This, then, I thought, is Miss Oliver, the heiress, favoured, it seems, in the gifts of fortune,
as well as in those of nature. What happy combination of the planets presided over her
birth, I wonder? I shall come up and help you to teach sometimes, she added. It will be a change
for me to visit you now and then. And I like a change. Mr. Rivers, I have been so gay during
my visit to S. Last night, or rather this morning, I was dancing till two o'clock. The Nth Regiment
are stationed there since the riots. And the officers are the most agreeable men in the world.
They put all our young knife-grinders and scissor-merchants to shame.
It seemed to me that Mr. St. John's underlip protruded, and his upper lip curled a moment.
His mouth certainly looked a good deal compressed, and the lower part of his face unusually stern and
square, as the laughing girl gave him this information. He lifted his gaze, too, from the
daisies and turned it on her. An unsmiling, a searching, a meaning gaze it was. She answered it
with a second laugh, and laughter well became her youth, her roses, her dimples, her bright eyes.
As he stood mute and grave, she again felt caressing Carlo.
Poor Carlo loves me, said she. He is not stern and distant to his friends, and if he could speak,
he would not be silent. As she patted the dog's head, bending with native grace before his young
and austere master, I saw a glow rise to that master's face. I saw his solemn eye melt with
sudden fire, and flicker with resistless emotion. Flushed and kindled thus, he looked nearly as
beautiful for a man as she for a woman. His chest heaved once, as if his large heart, weary of
despotic constriction, had expanded, despite the will, and made a vigorous bound for the attainment
of liberty. But he curbed it, I think, as a resolute rider would curb a rearing steed. He
responded neither by word nor movement to the gentle advances made him.
"'Papa says you never come to see us now,' continued Miss Oliver, looking up.
"'You are quite a stranger at Vale Hall. He is alone this evening, and not very well.
Will you return with me and visit him?'
"'It is not a seasonable hour to intrude on Mr. Oliver,' answered St. John.
"'Not a seasonable hour, but I declare it is. It is just the hour when Papa most wants company,
when the works are closed, and he has no business to occupy him. Now, Mr. Rivers, do come. Why are
you so very shy, and so very somber?' She filled up the hiatus, his silence left by a reply of her
own. "'I forgot,' she exclaimed, shaking her beautiful curled head, as if shocked at herself.
"'I am so giddy and thoughtless. Do excuse me. It had slipped my memory that you have good reasons
to be indisposed for joining in my chatter. Diana and Mary have left you, and Morehouse is shut up,
and you are so lonely. I am sure I pity you. Do come and see Papa.'
"'Not to-night, Miss Rosamond, not to-night.'
Mr. St. John spoke almost like an automaton. Himself only knew the effort it cost him thus to
refuse. "'Well, if you are so obstinate, I will leave you, for I dare not stay any longer. The
dew begins to fall. Good evening.' She held out her hand. He just touched it.
"'Good evening,' he repeated in a voice low and hollow as an echo. She turned, but in a moment
returned. "'Are you well?' she asked. Well might she put the question. His face was blanched as her
head fell down. "'Quite well,' he enunciated, and with a bow he left the gate. She went one way, he
another. She turned twice to gaze after him, as she tripped fairy-like down the field. He, as he
strode firmly across, never turned at all. This spectacle of another's suffering and sacrifice
wrapped my thoughts from exclusive meditation on my own. Diana Rivers had designated her brother
inexorable as death. She had not exaggerated."
I continued the labors of the village school as actively and faithfully as I could.
It was truly hard work at first. Some time elapsed before, with all my efforts, I could comprehend my scholars and their nature.
Wholly untaught, with faculties quite torpid, they seemed to me hopelessly dull, and, at first sight, all dull alike.
But I soon found I was mistaken. There was a difference amongst them as amongst the educated, and when I got to know them and they me, this difference rapidly developed itself.
Their amazement at me, my language, my rules and ways, once subsided. I found some of these heavy-looking, gaping rustics wake up into a sharp-witted girls enough.
Many showed themselves obliging and amiable, too, and I discovered amongst them not a few examples of capacity that won both my good-will and my admiration.
These soon took a pleasure in doing their work well, in keeping their persons neat, in learning their tasks regularly, in acquiring quiet and orderly manners.
The rapidity of their progress, in some instances, was even surprising, and an honest and happy pride I took in it. Besides, I began personally to like some of the best girls, and they liked me.
I had amongst my scholars several farmers' daughters, young women grown almost. These could already read, write and sew.
And to them I taught the elements of grammar, geography, history, and the finer kinds of needlework. I found estimable characters amongst them, characters desirous of information and disposed for improvement, with whom I passed many a pleasant evening hour in their own houses.
Their parents then, the farmer and his wife, loaded me with attentions. There was an enjoyment in accepting their simple kindness, and in repaying it by a consideration, a scrupulous regard to their feelings, to which they were not, perhaps, at all times customed, and which both charmed and benefited them, because while it elevated them in their own eyes, it made them amulets to merit the deferential treatment they received.
I felt I became a favorite in the neighborhood. Whenever I went out, I heard on all sides cordial salutations, and was welcomed with friendly smiles. To live amidst general regard, though it be but the regard of working people, is like sitting in sunshine calm and sweet. Serene inward feelings bud and bloom under the ray.
At this period of my life, my heart far oftener swelled with thankfulness than sank with dejection.
And yet, reader, to tell you all, in the midst of this calm, this useful existence, after a day passed in honorable exertion amongst my scholars, an evening spent in drawing or reading contentedly alone, I used to rush into strange dreams at night.
Dreams many-colored, agitated, full of the ideal, the stirring, the stormy. Dreams where, amidst unusual scenes, charged with adventure, with agitating risk and romantic chance, I still again and again meet Mr. Rochester, always at some exciting crisis.
And then the sense of being in his arms, hearing his voice, meeting his eye, touching his hand and cheek, loving him, being loved by him, the hope of passing a lifetime at his side, would be renewed with all its first force and fire.
Then I woke. Then I recalled where I was and how situated. Then I rose up on my curtainless bed, trembling and quivering. And then the still dark night witnessed the convulsion of despair and heard the burst of passion.
By nine o'clock the next morning I was punctually opening the school, tranquil, settled, prepared for the steady duties of the day.
Rosamund Oliver kept her word in coming to visit me. Her call at the school was generally made in the course of her morning ride. She would cantor up to the door on her pony, followed by a mounted livery servant.
Anything more exquisite than her appearance, in her purple habit, with her Amazon's cap of black velvet placed gracefully above the long curls that kissed her cheek and floated to her shoulders, can scarcely be imagined.
And it was thus she would enter the rustic building and glide through the dazzled ranks of the village children.
She generally came at the hour when Mr. Rivers was engaged in giving his daily catechizing lesson. Keenly, I fear, did the eye of the visitress pierce the young pastor's heart.
A sort of instinct seemed to warn him of her entrance, even when he did not see it. And when he was looking quite away from the door, if she appeared at it, her cheek would glow, and his marble-seeming features, though they refused to relax, changed indescribably, and in their very quinescence became expressive of a repressed fervor, stronger than working muscle or darting glance could indicate.
Of course, she knew her power. Indeed, he did not, because he could not conceal it from her. In spite of his Christian stoicism, when she went up and dressed him and smiled gaily, encouragingly, even fondly, in his face, his hand would tremble and his eye burn.
He seemed to say, with his sad and resolute look, if he did not say it with his lips,
I love you, and I know you prefer me. It is not despair of success that keeps me dumb. If I offered my heart, I believe you would accept it. But that heart is already laid on a sacred altar. The fire is arranged round it. It will soon be no more than a sacrifice consumed.
And then she would pout like a disappointed child. A pensive cloud would soften her radiant vivacity. She would withdraw her hand hastily from his, and turn in transient petulance from his aspect, at once so heroic and so martyr-like.
Saint John, no doubt, would have given the world to follow, recall, retain her, when she thus left him. But he would not give one chance of heaven, nor relinquish, for the Elysium of her love, one hope of the true eternal paradise.
Besides, he could not bind all that he had in his nature, the rover, the aspirant, the poet, the priest, in the limits of a single passion. He could not, he would not, renounce his wild field of mission warfare for the parlours and the peace of Vale Hall.
I learned so much from himself, in an inroad I once, despite his reserve, had the daring to make on his confidence. Miss Oliver already honoured me with frequent visits to my cottage. I had learned her whole character, which was without mystery or disguise.
She was coquettish, but not heartless, exacting, but not worthlessly selfish. She had been indulged from her birth, but was not absolutely spoiled. She was hasty, but good-humoured, vain—she could not help it, when every glance in the glass showed her such a flush of loveliness—but not affected.
Liberal-handed, innocent of the pride of wealth, ingenious, sufficiently intelligent, gay, lively, and unthinking, she was very charming, in short, even to a cool observer of her own sex like me. But she was not profoundly interesting or thoroughly impressive.
A very different sort of mind was hers from that, for instance, of the sisters of St. John. Still, I liked her almost as I liked my pupil Adele, except that, for a child whom we have watched over and taught, a closer affection is engendered than we can give an equally attractive adult acquaintance.
She had taken an amiable caprice to me, and said I was like Mr. Rivers, only certainly, she allowed, not one-tenth so handsome, though I was a nice neat little soul enough, but he was an angel. I was, however, good, clever, composed, and firm, like him. I was a Lucis Natre, she affirmed, as a village school mistress. She was sure my previous history, if known, would make a delightful romance.
One evening, while with her usual childlike activity, and thoughtless yet not offensive inquisitiveness, she was rummaging the cupboard and the table-drawer of my little kitchen. She discovered first two French books, a volume of Schuyler, a German grammar and dictionary, and then my drawing materials and some sketches, including a pencil head of a pretty little cherub-like girl, one of my scholars, and sundry views from nature, taken in the Vale of Morton and on the surrounding moors.
She was first transfixed with surprise, and then electrified with delight.
Had I done these pictures? Did I know French and German? What a love, what a miracle I was! I drew better than her master in the first school in S. Would I sketch a portrait of her to show to Papa?
With pleasure, I replied, and I felt a thrill of artist delight at the idea of copying so perfect and radiant a model. She had then a dark blue silk dress, her arms and her neck were bare. Her only ornament was her chest-notched tresses, which waved over her shoulders with all the wild grace of natural curls.
I took a sheet of fine cardboard and drew a careful outline. I promised myself the pleasure of coloring it, and, as it was getting late then, I told her she must come and sit another day.
She made such a report of me to her father that Mr. Oliver himself accompanied her next evening, a tall, massive-featured, middle-aged and gray-headed man, at whose side his lovely daughter looked like a bright flower near a hoary turret.
He appeared a taciturn and perhaps a proud personage, but he was very kind to me. The sketch of Rosamond's portrait pleased him highly. He said I must make a finished picture of it. He insisted, too, on my coming the next day to spend the evening at Vale Hall.
I went. I founded a large, handsome residence, showing abundant evidences of wealth in the proprietor. Rosamond was full of glee and pleasure all the time I stayed. Her father was affable, and when he entered into conversation with me after tea, he expressed in strong terms his approbation of what I had done in Morton School, and said he only feared, from what he saw and heard, I was too good for the place, and would soon quit it for one more suitable.
"'Indeed,' cried Rosamond, "'she is clever enough to be a governess in a high family, papa.'
I thought I would far rather be where I am than in any high family in the land. Mr. Oliver spoke of Mr. Rivers, of the Rivers family, with great respect. He said it was a very old name in that neighborhood, that the ancestors of the house were wealthy, that all Morton had once belonged to them, that even now he considered the representative of that house might, if he liked, make an alliance with the best.
He accounted it a pity that so fine and talented a young man should have formed the design of going out as a missionary. It was quite throwing a valuable life away. It appeared, then, that her father would throw no obstacle in the way of Rosamond's union with St. John.
Mr. Oliver evidently regarded the young clergyman's good birth, old name, and sacred profession as sufficient compensation for the want of fortune.
It was the fifth of November and a holiday. My little servant, after helping me to clean my house, was gone, well satisfied with the fee of a penny for her aid. All about me was spotless and bright, scoured floor, polished grate, and well rubbed chairs. I had also made myself neat, and had now the afternoon before me to spend as I would.
The translation of a few pages of German occupied an hour. Then I got my palette and pencils and fell to the more soothing, because easier, occupation of completing Rosamond Oliver's miniature. The head was finished already. There was but the background to tint and the drapery to shade off. A touch of carmine, too, to add to the ripe lips. A soft curl here and there to the tresses. A deeper tinge to the shadow of the lash under the azured eyelid.
I was absorbed in the execution of these nice details, when after one rapid tap my door unclosed, admitting St. John Rivers.
I am come to see how you are spending your holiday, he said. Not, I hope, in thought. Know that as well. While you draw, you will not feel lonely. You see, I mistrust you still. Though you have borne up wonderfully so far, I have brought you a book for evening solace.
And he laid on the table a new publication, a poem, one of those genuine productions so often vouchsafe to the fortunate public of those days, the golden age of modern literature. Alas, the readers of my era are less favored. But, courage, I will not pause either to accuse or repine.
I know poetry is not dead, nor genius lost, nor has Maimon gained power over either, to bind or slay. They will both assert their existence, their presence, their liberty and strength again one day.
Powerful angels safe in heaven, they smile when sordid souls triumph, and feeble ones weep over their destruction. Poetry destroyed? Genius banished? No, mediocrity, no! Do not let envy prompt you to the thought. No, they not only live, but reign and redeem. And without their divine influence spread everywhere, you would be in hell, the hell of your own meanness.
While I was eagerly glancing at the bright pages of Marmion—for Marmion it was—St. John stooped to examine my drawing. His tall figure sprang erect again with a start. He said nothing. I looked up at him. He shunned my eye. I knew his thoughts well, and could read his heart plainly, at the moment I felt calmer and cooler than he.
I had then temporarily the advantage of him, and I conceived an inclination to do him some good, if I could. With all his firmness and self-control, thought I, he tasks himself too far, locks every feeling and pain within, expresses confesses imparts nothing. I am sure it would benefit him to talk a little about his sweet Rosamond, whom he thinks he ought not to marry. I will make him talk.
I said first,
Take a chair, Mr. Rivers.
But he answered, as he always did, that he could not stay.
Very well, I responded mentally. Stand if you like. But you shall not go just yet. I am determined. Solitude is at least as bad for you as it is for me. I'll try if I cannot discover the secret spring of your confidence, and find an aperture in that marble breast through which I can shed one drop of the balm of sympathy.
Is this portrait like? I asked bluntly.
Like? Like whom? I did not observe it closely.
You did, Mr. Rivers.
He almost started at my sudden and strange abruptness. He looked at me astonished.
Oh, that is nothing yet, I muttered within. I don't mean to be baffled by a little stiffness on your part. I am prepared to go considerable lengths.
I continued,
You observed it closely and distinctly. But I have no objection to your looking at it again.
And I rose and placed it in his hand.
A well-executed picture, he said. Very soft, clear coloring, very graceful, and correct drawing.
Yes, yes, I know all that. But what of the resemblance? Who is it like?
Mastering some hesitation, he answered.
Miss Oliver, I presume.
Of course. And now, sir, to reward you for that accurate guess, I promised to paint you a careful and faithful duplicate of this very picture, provided you admit that the gift would be acceptable to you.
I don't wish to throw away my time and trouble on an offering you would deem worthless.
He continued to gaze at the picture. The longer he looked, the firmer he held it, the more he seemed to covet it.
It is like, he murmured. The eye is well managed. The color, light expression, are perfect. It smiles.
Would it comfort, or would it wound you to have a similar painting? Tell me that. When you are in Madagascar, or in the Cape, or in India, would it be a consolation to have that momento in your possession?
Or would the sight of it bring recollections calculated to enervate and distress?
He now furtively raised his eyes. He glanced at me, irresolute, disturbed. He again surveyed the picture.
That I should like to have it is certain. Whether it would be judicious or wise is another question.
Since I have ascertained that Rosamond really preferred him, and that her father was not likely to oppose the match, I, less exalted in my views than St. John, had been strongly disposed in my own heart to advocate their union.
It seemed to me that, should he become the possessor of Mr. Oliver's large fortune, he might do as much good with it as if he went and laid his genius out to wither, and his strength to waste under a tropical sun.
With that persuasion I now answered, As far as I can see, it would be wiser and more judicious if you were to take to yourself the original at once.
By this time he had sat down. He had laid the picture on the table before him, and with his brow supported on both hands, hung fondly over it.
I discerned he was now neither angry nor shocked at my audacity. I saw even that, to be thus frankly addressed on a subject he had deemed unapproachable, to hear it thus freely handled, was beginning to be felt by him as a new pleasure, an unhoped for relief.
Reserved people often really need the frank discussion of their sentiments and griefs, more than the expansive. The sternest-seeming stoic is human after all, and a burst with boldness and good-will into the silent sea of their soul is often to confer on them the first of obligations.
She likes you, I am sure, said I, as I stood behind his chair, and her father respects you. Moreover, she is a sweet girl, rather thoughtless, but you would have sufficient thought for both yourself and her. You ought to marry her.
Does she like me? he asked.
Certainly. Better than she likes any one else. She talks of you continually. There is no subject she enjoys so much or touches upon so often.
It is very pleasant to hear this, he said.
Very.
Go on for another quarter of an hour.
And he actually took out his watch and laid it upon the table to measure the time.
But where is the use of going on, I asked, when you are probably preparing some iron blow of contradiction or forging a fresh chain to fetter your heart?
Don't imagine such hard things. Fancy me yielding and melting as I am doing. Human love rising like a freshly opened fountain in my mind and overflowing, with sweet inundation all the field I have so carefully and with such labor prepared, so assiduously sown with the seeds of good intentions, of self-denying plans, and how it is deluged with a nectarous flood.
The young germs swamped, delicious poison cankering them. Now I see myself stretched on an ottoman in the drawing room, at Vale Hall, at my bride Rosamund Oliver's feet.
She is talking to me with her sweet voice, gazing down on me with those eyes your skillful hand has copied so well, smiling at me with these coral lips. She is mine. I am hers. This present life and passing world suffice to me.
Hush. Say nothing. My heart is full of delight. My senses are entranced. Let the time I marked pass in peace.
I humoured him. The watch ticked on. He breathed fast and low. I stood silent. Amidst this hush, the quartet sped. He replaced the watch, laid the picture down, rose, and stood on the hearth.
Now, said he, that little space was given to delirium and delusion. I rested my temples on the breast of temptation and put my neck voluntarily under her yoke of flowers.
I tasted her cup. The pillow was burning. There is an asp in the garland. The wine has a bitter taste. Her promises are hollow. Her offer's false. I see and know all this.
I gazed at him in wonder. It is strange, pursued him, that while I love Rosamund Oliver so wildly, with all the intensity indeed of a first passion, the object of which is exquisitely beautiful, graceful, fascinating, I experience at the same time a calm, unwrapped consciousness that she would not make me a good wife.
That she is not the partner suited to me, and I would discover this within a year after marriage, and that twelve months' rapture would succeed a lifetime of regret. This I know.
Strange indeed! I could not help ejaculating. While something in me, he went on, is acutely sensible to her charms, something else is so deeply impressed with her defects. They are such that she would sympathize in nothing I aspired to, cooperate in nothing I undertook.
Rosamund, a sufferer, a laborer, a female apostle? Rosamund, a missionary's wife? No. But you need not be a missionary. You might relinquish that scheme.
Relinquish? What, my vocation, my great work, my foundation laid on earth for a mansion in heaven, my hopes of being numbered in the band who have merged all ambitions in the glorious one of bettering their race, of carrying knowledge into the realms of ignorance, of substituting peace for war, freedom for bondage, religion for superstition, the hope of heaven for the fear of hell?
Must I relinquish that? It is dearer than the blood in my veins. It is what I have to look forward to and to live for.
After a considerable pause, I said,
And Miss Oliver, are her disappointment and sorrow of no interest to you?
Miss Oliver is ever surrounded by suitors and flatterers. In less than a month my image will be effaced from her heart. She will forget me, and will marry probably someone who will make her far happier than I should do.
You speak coolly enough, but you suffer in the conflict. You are wasting away.
No, if I get a little thin it is with anxiety about my prospects. Yet unsettled, my departure continually procrastinated. Only this morning I received intelligence that the successor, whose arrival I have been so long expecting, cannot be ready to replace me for three months to come yet, and perhaps the three months may extend to six.
You tremble and become flushed whenever Miss Oliver enters the schoolroom.
Again the surprised expression crossed his face. He had not imagined that a woman would dare to speak so to a man. For me, I felt at home in this sort of discourse. I could never rest in communication with strong, discreet, and refined minds, whether male or female, till I had passed the outwards of conventional reserve, and crossed the threshold of confidence, and won a place by their heart's very hearthstone.
You are original, said he, and not timid. There is something brave in your spirit, as well as penetrating in your eye. But allow me to assure you that you partially misinterpret my emotions. You think them more profound and potent than they are. You give me a larger allowance of sympathy than I have a just claim to.
When I color and when I shade before Miss Oliver, I do not pity myself. I scorn the weakness. I know it is ignoble, a mere fever of the flesh. Not, I declare, the convulsion of the soul. That is just as fixed as a rock, firm, set in the depths of a restless sea. Know me to be what I am, a cold, hard man.
I smiled incredulously.
You have taken my confidence by storm, he continued, and now it is much at your service. I am simply in my original state, stripped of that blood-bleached robe with which Christianity covers human deformity, a cold, hard, ambitious man. Natural affection only of all the sentiments has permanent power over me.
Reason and not feeling is my guide. My ambition is unlimited. My desire to rise higher, to do more than others insatiable. I honor endurance, perseverance, industry, talent, because these are the means by which men achieve great ends and mount to lofty eminence. I watch your career with interest, because I consider you a specimen of a diligent, orderly, energetic woman, not because I deeply compassionate what you have gone through or what you still suffer.
You would describe yourself as a mere pagan philosopher, I said.
No, there is this difference between me and diastic philosophers. I believe, and I believe the gospel.
You missed your epithet. I am not a pagan, but a Christian philosopher, a follower of the sect of Jesus. As his disciple, I adopt his pure, his merciful, his benignant doctrines. I advocate them. I am sworn to spread them.
One in youth to religion, she has cultivated my original qualities thus. From the minute germ, natural affection, she has developed the overshadowing tree philanthropy. From the wild stringy root of human uprightness, she has reared a due sense of the divine justice, of the ambition to win power and renown for her wretched self. She has formed the ambition to spread my master's kingdom to achieve victories for the standard of the cross.
So much has religion done for me, turning the original materials to the best account, pruning and training nature. But she could not eradicate nature, nor will it be eradicated, till this mortal shall put on immortality.
Having said this, he took his hat, which lay on the table beside my pallet. Once more he looked at the portrait.
She is lovely, he murmured. She is well named, the rose of the world, indeed.
And may I not paint one like it for you?
Cibono, no.
He drew over the picture the sheet of thin paper on which I was accustomed to rest my hand in painting, to prevent the cardboard from being sullied.
What he suddenly saw on this blank paper it was impossible for me to tell, but something had caught his eye. He took it up with a snatch, he looked at the edge, then shot a glance at me.
An expressively peculiar and quite incomprehensible, a glance that seemed to take and make note of every point in my shape, face and dress, for it traversed all, quick, keen as lightning.
His lips parted as if to speak, but he checked the coming sentence, whatever it was.
What is the matter? I asked.
Nothing in the world, was the reply, and, replacing the paper, I saw him dexterously tear a narrow strip from the margin. It disappeared in his glove, and with one hasty nod and good afternoon he vanished.
Well, I exclaimed, using an expression of the district, that caps the globe, however.
I, in my turn, scrutinized the paper, but saw nothing on it save a few dingy stains of paint, where I had tried the tint in my pencil.
I pondered the mystery a minute or two, but finding it insolvable, and being certain it could not be of much moment, I dismissed and soon forgot it.
The End
When Mr. St. John went, it was beginning to snow.
The whirling storm continued all night.
The next day a keen wind brought fresh and blinding falls.
By twilight the valley was drifted up and almost impassable.
I had closed my shutter, laid a mat to the door to prevent the snow from blowing in under
it, trimmed my fire, and after sitting nearly an hour on the hearth listening to the muffled
fury of the tempest, I lit a candle, took down Marmion, and beginning.
Day set on Norham's castled steep, and Tweed's fair river broad and deep, and Cheviot's mountain's
lone, the massive towers, the donjon keep, the flanking walls that round them sweep in
the yellow luster shone.
I soon forgot storm in music.
I heard a noise.
The wind, I thought, shook the door.
No, it was St. John Rivers, who, lifting the latch, came in out of the frozen hurricane,
the howling darkness, and stood before me, the cloak that covered his tall figure all
white as a glacier.
I was almost in consternation, so little had I expected any guest from the blocked-up vale
that night.
Any ill news, I demanded.
Has anything happened?
No, how very easily alarmed you are, he answered, removing his cloak and hanging it up against
the door, towards which he again coolly pushed the mat which his entrance had deranged.
He stamped the snow from his boots.
I shall sully the purity of your floor, said he, but you must excuse me for once.
Then he approached the fire.
I have had hard work to get here, I assure you, he observed, as he warmed his hands over
the flame.
One drift took me up to the waste.
Happily, the snow is quite soft yet.
But why are you come?
I could not forbear saying.
Rather an inhospitable question to put to a visitor, but, since you ask it, I answer
simply to have a little talk with you.
I got tired of my mute books and empty rooms.
Besides, since yesterday, I have experienced the excitement of a person to whom a tale
has been half told, and who is impatient to hear the sequel.
He sat down.
I recalled his singular conduct of yesterday, and really I began to fear his wits were touched.
If he were insane, however, his was a very cool and collected insanity.
I had never seen that handsome featured face of his look more like chiseled marble than
it did just now, as he put aside his snow-wet hair from his forehead and let the firelight
shine free on his pale brow and cheek as pale, where it grieved me to discover the
hollow trace of care or sorrow now so plainly graved.
I waited, expecting he would say something I could at least comprehend.
But his hand was now at his chin, his finger on his lip, he was thinking.
It struck me that his hand looked wasted like his face.
A perhaps uncalled-for gush of pity came over my heart.
I was moved to say,
I wish Diana or Mary would come and live with you.
It is too bad that you should be quite alone, and you are recklessly rash about your own health.
Not at all, said he.
I care for myself when necessary.
I am well now.
What do you see amiss in me?
This was said with a careless, abstracted indifference,
which showed that my solicitude was, at least in his opinion, wholly superfluous.
I was silenced.
He still slowly moved his finger over his upper lip,
and still his eye dwelt dreamily on the glowing grate.
Thinking it urgent to say something,
I asked him presently if he felt any cold draft from the door which was behind him.
No, no, he responded shortly and somewhat testily.
Well, I reflected, if you won't talk, you may be still.
I'll let you alone now and return to my book.
So I snuffed the candle and resumed the perusal of Marmion.
He soon stirred.
My eye was instantly drawn to his movements.
He only took out a Morocco pocketbook,
thence produced a letter which he read in silence, folded it, put it back,
relapsed into meditation.
It was vain to try to read with such an inscrutable fixture before me,
nor could I, in impatience, consent to be dumb.
He might rebuff me if he liked, but talk I would.
Have you heard from Diana and Mary lately?
Not since the letter I showed you a week ago.
There has not been any change made about your own arrangements.
You will not be summoned to leave England sooner than you expected.
I fear not, indeed.
Such chance is too good to befall me.
Baffled so far, I changed my ground.
I bethought myself to talk about the school and my scholars.
Mary Garrett's mother is better, and Mary came back to school this morning,
and I shall have four new girls next week from the foundry clothes.
They would have come today but for the snow.
Indeed.
Mr. Oliver pays for two.
Does he?
He means to give the whole school a treat at Christmas.
I know.
Was it your suggestion?
No.
Whose, then?
His daughter's, I think.
It is like her.
She is so good-natured.
Yes.
Again came the blank of a pause.
The clock struck eight strokes.
It aroused him.
He uncrossed his legs, sat erect, turned to me.
Leave your book a moment, and come a little nearer the fire, he said.
Wondering, and of my wonder finding no end, I complied.
Half an hour ago, he pursued,
I spoke of my impatience to hear the sequel of a tale.
On reflection, I find the matter will be better managed
by my assuming the narrator's part, and converting you into a listener.
Before commencing, it is but fair to warn you
that the story will sound somewhat hackneyed in your ears,
but stale details often regain a degree of freshness when they pass through new lips.
For the rest, whether trite or novel, it is short.
Twenty years ago, a poor curate, never mind his name at this moment,
fell in love with a rich man's daughter.
She fell in love with him and married him against the advice of all her friends,
who consequently disowned her immediately after the wedding.
Before two years passed, the rash pair were both dead
and laid quietly side by side under one slab.
I have seen their grave.
It formed part of the pavement of a huge churchyard
surrounding the grim, soot-black old cathedral of an overgrown manufacturing town in Blankshire.
They left a daughter, which, at its very birth, charity received in her lap.
Cold as that of the snowdrift I almost stuck fast in tonight.
Charity carried the friendless thing to the house of its rich maternal relations.
It was reared by an aunt-in-law called, I come to names now, Mrs. Reed of Gateshead.
You start, and did you hear a noise?
I dare say it is only a rat scrambling along the rafters of the adjoining schoolroom.
It was a barn before I had it repaired and altered, and barns are generally haunted by rats.
To proceed.
Mrs. Reed kept the orphan ten years.
Whether it was happy or not with her, I cannot say, never having been told.
But at the end of that time she transferred it to a place you know,
being no other than Lowood School, where you so long resided yourself.
It seems her career there was very honourable.
From a pupil, she became a teacher like yourself.
Really, it strikes me there are parallel points in her history and yours.
She left it to be a governess.
There again your fates were analogous.
She undertook the education of the ward of a certain Mr. Rochester.
Mr. Rivers, I interrupted.
I can guess your feelings, he said, but restrain them for a while.
I have nearly finished, hear me to the end.
Of Mr. Rochester's character I know nothing, but the one fact that he professed to offer
honourable marriage to this young girl, and that at the very altar
she discovered he had a wife yet alive, though a lunatic.
What his subsequent conduct and proposals were is a matter of pure conjecture.
But when an event transpired which rendered inquiry after the governess necessary,
it was discovered she was gone.
No one could tell when, where, or how.
She had left Thornfield Hall in the night.
Every research after her course had been vain.
The country had been scoured far and wide.
No vestige of information could be gathered respecting her.
Yet that she should be found is become a matter of serious urgency.
Advertisements have been put in all the papers.
I myself have received a letter from one Mr. Briggs, a solicitor,
communicating the details I have just imparted.
Is it not an odd tale?
Just tell me this, said I, and since you know so much you surely can tell it me.
What of Mr. Rochester?
How and where is he?
What is he doing?
Is he well?
I am ignorant of all concerning Mr. Rochester.
The letter never mentions him but to narrate the fraudulent
and illegal attempt I have adverted to.
You should rather ask the name of the governess,
the nature of the event which requires her appearance.
Did no one go to Thornfield Hall then?
Did no one see Mr. Rochester?
I suppose not.
But they wrote to him.
Of course.
And what did he say?
Who has his letters?
Mr. Briggs intimates that the answer to his application
was not from Mr. Rochester but from a lady.
It is signed Alice Fairfax.
I felt cold and dismayed.
My worst fears then were probably true.
He had in all probability left England
and rushed in reckless desperation to some former haunt on the continent.
And what opiate for his severe sufferings,
what object for his strong passions had he sought there?
I dared not answer the question.
Oh, my poor master, once almost my husband,
whom I had often called my dear Edward.
He must have been a bad man, observed Mr. Rivers.
You don't know him, don't pronounce an opinion upon him, I said with warmth.
Very well, he answered quietly.
And indeed, my head is otherwise occupied than with him.
I have my tale to finish.
Since you won't ask the governess's name,
I must tell it of my own accord.
Stay, I have it here.
It is always more satisfactory to see important points written down
fairly committed to black and white.
And the pocketbook was again deliberately produced, opened, sought through.
From one of its compartments was extracted a shabby slip of paper hastily torn off.
I recognized in its texture and its stains of ultramarine and lake and vermilion
the ravished margin of the portrait cover.
He got up, held it close to my eyes,
and I read, traced in Indian ink in my own handwriting,
the words Jane Eyre, the work doubtless of some moment of abstraction.
Briggs wrote to me of a Jane Eyre, he said.
The advertisements demanded a Jane Eyre.
I knew a Jane Elliot.
I confess I had my suspicions,
but it was only yesterday afternoon they were at once resolved into certainty.
You own the name and renounce the alias?
Yes, yes, but where is Mr. Briggs?
He perhaps knows more of Mr. Rochester than you do.
Briggs is in London.
I should doubt his knowing anything at all about Mr. Rochester.
It is not in Mr. Rochester he is interested.
Meantime you forget essential points in pursuing trifles.
You do not inquire why Mr. Briggs sought after you what he wanted with you.
Well, what did he want?
Merely to tell you that your uncle, Mr. Eyre of Madeira, is dead,
that he has left you all his property,
and that you are now rich, merely that, nothing more.
I, rich?
Yes, you, rich, quite an heiress.
Silence succeeded.
You must prove your identity, of course,
resumed St. John presently.
A step which will offer no difficulties.
You can then enter on immediate possession.
Your fortune is vested in the English funds.
Briggs has the will and the necessary documents.
Here was a new card turned up.
It is a fine thing, reader, to be lifted in a moment from indigence to wealth,
a very fine thing, but not a matter one can comprehend or consequently enjoy all at once.
And then there are other chances in life far more thrilling and rapture-giving.
This is solid, an affair of the actual world, nothing ideal about it.
All its associations are solid and sober, and its manifestations are the same.
One does not jump and spring and shout hurrah at hearing one has got a fortune.
One begins to consider responsibilities and to ponder business.
On a base of steady satisfaction rise certain grave cares,
and we contain ourselves and brood over our bliss with a solemn brow.
Besides, the words legacy, bequest, go side by side with the words death, funeral.
My uncle, I had heard, was dead, my only relative.
Ever since being made aware of his existence, I had cherished the hope of one day seeing him.
Now I never should.
And then this money came only to me, not to me and a rejoicing family, but to my isolated self.
It was a grand boon, doubtless, and independence would be glorious.
Yes, I felt that. That thought swelled my heart.
You unbend your forehead at last, said Mr. Rivers.
I thought Medusa had looked at you and that you were turning to stone.
Perhaps now you will ask how much you are worth.
How much am I worth?
Oh, a trifle. Nothing, of course, to speak of.
Twenty thousand pounds, I think they say. But what is that?
Twenty thousand pounds!
Here was a new stunner. I had been calculating on four or five thousand.
This news actually took my breath for a moment.
Mr. St. John, whom I had never heard laugh before, laughed now.
Well, said he, if you had committed a murder and I had told you your crime was discovered,
you could scarcely look more aghast.
It is a large sum. Don't you think there is a mistake?
No mistake at all.
Perhaps you have read the figures wrong. It may be two thousand.
It is written in letters, not figures. Twenty thousand.
I again felt rather like an individual of but average gastronomical powers,
sitting down to feast alone at a table spread with provisions for a hundred.
Mr. Rivers rose now and put his cloak on.
If it were not such a very wild night, he said, I would send Hannah down to keep you company.
You look too desperately miserable to be left alone.
But Hannah, poor woman, could not stride the drifts so well as I.
Her legs are not quite so long. So I must in-leave you to your sorrows.
Good night.
He was lifting the latch. A sudden thought occurred to me.
Stop one minute, I cried.
Well?
It puzzles me to know why Mr. Briggs wrote to you about me, or how he knew you or could fancy
that you, living in such an out-of-the-way place, had the power to aid in my discovery.
Well, I am a clergyman, he said, and the clergy are often appealed to about odd matters.
Again the latch rattled.
No, that does not satisfy me, I exclaimed, and indeed there was something in the hasty
and unexplanatory reply which, instead of allaying, piqued my curiosity more than ever.
It is a very strange piece of business, I added. I must know more about it.
Another time.
No, tonight, tonight.
And as he turned from the door, I placed myself between it and him. He looked rather embarrassed.
You certainly shall not go till you have told me all, I said.
I would rather not just now.
You shall, you must.
I would rather Diana or Mary informed you.
Of course these objections wrought my eagerness to a climax,
gratified it must be, and that without delay, and I told him so.
But I apprised you that I was a hard man, said he, difficult to persuade.
And I am a hard woman, impossible to put off.
And then, he pursued, I am cold, no fervour infects me.
Whereas I am hot and fire dissolves ice, the blaze there has thawed all the snow from your cloak.
By the same token it has streamed onto my floor and made it like a trampled street.
As you hope ever to be forgiven, Mr. Rivers,
the high crime and misdemeanour of spoiling a santed kitchen. Tell me what I wish to know.
Well then, he said, I yield, if not to your earnestness, to your perseverance,
as stone is worn by continual dropping. Besides, you must know some day, as well now as later.
Your name is Jane Eyre.
Of course that was all settled before.
You are not, perhaps, aware that I am your namesake, that I was christened St. John Eyre Rivers?
No, indeed. I remember now seeing the letter E comprised in your initials written in books
you have at different times lent me. But I never asked for what name it stood.
But what then, surely?
I stopped. I could not trust myself to entertain, much less to express, the thought that rushed upon
me, that embodied itself, that in a second stood out a strong, solid probability. Circumstances
knit themselves, fitted themselves, shot into order. The chain that had been lying hitherto
a formless lump of links was drawn out straight. Every ring was perfect, the connection complete.
I knew by instinct how the matter stood before St. John had said another word.
But I cannot expect the reader to have the same intuitive perception, so I must repeat his
explanation. My mother's name was Eyre. She had two brothers, one a clergyman, who married
Miss Jane Reid of Gateshead, the other John Eyre Esquire Merchant, late of Funkle, Madeira.
Mr. Briggs, being Mr. Eyre's solicitor, wrote to us last August to inform us of our uncle's death,
and to say that he had left his property to his brother the clergyman's orphan daughter,
overlooking us in consequence of a quarrel never forgiven between him and my father.
He wrote again a few weeks since, to intimate that the heiress was lost,
and asking if we knew anything of her. A name, casually written on a slip of paper,
has enabled me to find her out. You know the rest.
Again he was going, but I set my back against the door.
Do let me speak, I said. Let me have one moment to draw breath and reflect.
I paused. He stood before me, hat in hand, looking composed enough. I resumed.
Your mother was my father's sister. Yes.
My aunt, consequently. He bowed.
My Uncle John was your Uncle John? You, Diana, and Mary are his sister's children,
as I am his brother's child? Undeniably.
You three, then, are my cousins. Half our blood on each side flows from the same source.
We are cousins, yes. I surveyed him.
It seemed I had found a brother, one I could be proud of,
one I could love, and two sisters whose qualities were such that when I knew them
but as mere strangers they had inspired me with genuine affection and admiration.
The two girls on whom, kneeling down on the wet ground and looking through the low,
latticed window of Moore House kitchen, I had gazed, with so bitter a mixture of interest
and despair, were my near kinswomen, and the young and stately gentleman who had found me
almost dying at his threshold was my blood relation, glorious discovery to a lonely wretch.
This was wealth indeed, wealth to the heart, a mine of pure genial affections.
This was a blessing, bright, vivid, and exhilarating, not like the ponderous gift of
gold, rich and welcome enough in its way, but sobering from its weight. I now clapped my hands
in sudden joy. My pulse bounded, my veins thrilled.
Oh, I am glad, I am glad, I exclaimed. St. John smiled.
Did I not say you neglected essential points to pursue trifles? He asked.
You were serious when I told you you had got a fortune, and now, for a matter of no moment,
you are excited. What can you mean? It may be of no moment to you.
You have sisters and don't care for a cousin. But I had nobody, and now three relations,
or two, if you don't choose to be counted, are born into my world full-grown. I say again,
I am glad. I walked fast through the room. I stopped, half-suffocated, with the thoughts that
faster than I could receive, comprehend, settle them, thoughts of what might, could,
would, and should be, and that ere long. I looked at the blank wall. It seemed a sky
thick with ascending stars. Everyone lit me to a purpose or delight. Those who had saved my life,
whom, till this hour, I had loved barrenly, I could now benefit. They were under a yoke.
I could free them. They were scattered. I could reunite them. The independence, the affluence,
which was mine, might be theirs too. Were we not four? Twenty thousand pounds shared equally
be five thousand each. Justice enough and to spare. Justice would be done. Mutual happiness
secured. Now the wealth did not weigh on me. Now it was not a mere bequest of coin.
It was a legacy of life, hope, enjoyment. How I looked while these ideas were taking my spirit
by storm, I cannot tell. But I perceived soon that Mr. Rivers had placed a chair behind me
and was gently attempting to make me sit down on it. He also advised me to be composed. I scorned
the insinuation of helplessness and distraction, shook off his hand, and began to walk about again.
Write to Diana and Mary tomorrow, I said, and tell them to come home directly.
Diana said they would both consider themselves rich with a thousand pounds,
so with five thousand they will do very well. Tell me where I can get you a glass of water,
said St. John. You must really make an effort to tranquilize your feelings.
Nonsense! And what sort of an effect will the bequest have on you? Will it keep you in England,
induce you to marry Miss Oliver, and settle down like an ordinary mortal?
You wander. Your head becomes confused. I have been too abrupt in communicating the news.
It has excited you beyond your strength.
Mr. Rivers, you quite put me out of patience. I am rational enough. It is you who misunderstand,
or rather who affect to misunderstand. Perhaps if you explained yourself a little more fully,
I should comprehend better. Explain? What is there to explain? You cannot fail to see
that twenty thousand pounds, the sum in question, divided equally between the nephew and three
nieces of our uncle, will give five thousand to each. What I want is that you should write
to your sisters and tell them of the fortune that has accrued to them. To you, you mean?
I have intimated my view of the case. I am incapable of taking any other. I am not brutally
selfish, blindly unjust, or fiendishly ungrateful. Besides, I am resolved I will have a home and
connections. I like Morehouse, and I will live at Morehouse. I like Diana and Mary, and I will
attach myself for life to Diana and Mary. It would please and benefit me to have five thousand
pounds. It would torment and oppress me to have twenty thousand, which, moreover, could never be
mine injustice, though it might in law. I abandon to you, then, what is absolutely superfluous to me.
Let there be no opposition and no discussion about it. Let us agree amongst each other
and decide the point at once. This is acting on first impulses. You must take days to consider
such a matter, ere your word can be regarded as valid. Oh, if all you doubt is my sincerity,
I am easy. You see the justice of the case? I do see a certain justice, but it is contrary
to all custom. Besides, the entire fortune is your right. My uncle gained it by his own efforts.
He was free to leave it to whom he would. He left it to you. After all, justice permits you
to keep it. You may, with a clear conscience, consider it absolutely your own.
With me, said I, it is fully as much a matter of feeling as of conscience. I must indulge my
feelings. I so seldom have had an opportunity of doing so. Were you to argue, object, and annoy me
for a year, I could not forgo the delicious pleasure of which I have caught a glimpse,
that of repaying, in part, a mighty obligation, and winning to myself lifelong friends.
You think so now, rejoined St. John, because you do not know what it is to possess,
nor consequently to enjoy, wealth. You cannot form a notion of the importance
twenty thousand pounds would give you, of the place it would enable you to take in society,
of the prospects it would open to you. You cannot. And you, I interrupted, cannot at all
imagine the craving I have for fraternal and sisterly love. I never had a home. I never had
brothers or sisters. I must and will have them now. You are not reluctant to admit me and own me,
are you? Jane, I will be your brother. My sisters will be your sisters, without stipulating for this
sacrifice of your just rights. Brother, yes, at the distance of a thousand leagues. Sisters, yes,
slaving amongst strangers. I, wealthy, gorged with gold I never earned, and do not merit. You,
penniless, famous equality in fraternization, close union, intimate attachment. But, Jane,
your aspirations after family ties and domestic happiness may be realized otherwise
than by the means you contemplate. You may marry. Nonsense again. Marry. I don't want to marry,
and never shall marry. That is saying too much. Such hazardous affirmations are a proof
of the excitement under which you labor. It is not saying too much. I know what I feel,
and how averse are my inclinations to the bare thought of marriage. No one would take me for
love, and I will not be regarded in the light of a mere money speculation. And I do not want a
stranger, unsympathizing, alien, different from me. I want my kindred, those with whom I have full
fellow feeling. Say again you will be my brother. When you uttered the words, I was satisfied,
happy. Repeat them, if you can. Repeat them sincerely. I think I can. I know I have always
loved my own sisters, and I know on what my affection for them is grounded respect for their
worth and admiration of their talents. You too have principle and mind. Your tastes and habits
resemble Diana's and Mary's. Your presence is always agreeable to me. In your conversation,
I have already for some time found a salutary solace. I feel I can easily and naturally make
in my heart for you as my third and youngest sister. Thank you. That contents me for tonight.
Now you had better go, for if you stay longer you will perhaps irritate me afresh by some
mistrustful scruple. And the school, Miss Eyre. It must now be shut up, I suppose.
No, I will retain my post of mistress till you get a substitute.
He smiled at probation, we shook hands, and he took leave.
I need not narrate in detail the further struggles I had and arguments I used to get
matters regarding the legacy settled as I wished. My task was a very hard one, but as I was absolutely
resolved, as my cousins saw at length that my mind was really and immutably fixed on making a
just division of the property, as they must in their own hearts have felt the equity of the
intention, and must besides have been innately conscious that in my place they would have done
precisely what I wished to do, they yielded at length so far as to consent to put the affair
to arbitration. The judges chosen were Mr. Oliver and an able lawyer. Both coincided,
in my opinion, I carried my point. The instruments of transfer were drawn out. St. John, Diana,
Mary, and I, each became possessed of a competency.
It was near Christmas, by the time all was settled.
The season of general holiday approached.
I now closed Morton's school, taking care that the parting should not be barren on my
side.
Good fortune opens the hand as well as the heart wonderfully, and to give some what when
we have largely received is but to afford a vent to the unusual ebullition of the sensations.
I had long felt with pleasure that many of my rustic scholars liked me, and when we parted,
that consciousness was confirmed.
They manifested their affection plainly and strongly.
Deep was my gratification to find I had really a place in their unsophisticated hearts.
I promised them that never a week should pass in future that I did not visit them and give
them an hour's teaching in their school.
Mr. Rivers came up as, having seen the classes now numbering sixty girls file out before
me and lock the door, I stood with the key in my hand, exchanging a few words of special
farewell with some half-dozen of my best scholars, as decent, respectable, modest, and well-informed
young women as could be found in the ranks of the British peasantry.
And that is saying a great deal, for, after all, the British peasantry are the best-taught,
best-mannered, most self-respecting of any in Europe.
Since those days I have seen paisans and bayrungen, and the best of them seem to me ignorant,
of course, and besotted compared with my Morton girls.
Do you consider you have got your reward for a season of exertion, asked Mr. Rivers when
they were gone?
Does not the consciousness of having done some real good in your day and generation
give pleasure?
Doubtless.
And you have only toiled a few months.
Would not a life devoted to the task of regenerating your race be well spent?
Yes, I said.
But I could not go on for ever so.
I want to enjoy my own faculties as well as to cultivate those of other people.
I must enjoy them now.
Don't recall either my mind or body to the school.
I am out of it and disposed for full holiday.
He looked grave.
What now?
What sudden eagerness is this, you events?
What are you going to do?
To be active, as active as I can.
And first I must beg you to set Hannah at liberty and get somebody else to wait on you.
Do you want her?
Yes, to go with me to Morehouse.
Diana and Mary will be at home in a week, and I want to have everything in order against
their arrival.
I understand.
I thought you were flying off on some excursion.
It is better so.
Hannah shall go with you.
Tell her to be ready by to-morrow then, and here is the school-room key.
I will give you the key of my cottage in the morning.
He took it.
You give it up very gleefully, said he.
I don't quite understand your light-heartedness, because I cannot tell what employment you
propose to yourself as a substitute for the one you are relinquishing.
What aim, what purpose, what ambition in life have you now?
My first aim will be to clean down.
Do you comprehend the full force of the expression?
To clean down Morehouse from chamber to cellar.
My next to rub it up with beeswax, oil, and an indefinite number of cloths till it glitters again.
My third to arrange every chair, table, bed, carpet with mathematical precision.
Afterwards I shall go near to ruin you in coals and peat to keep up good fires in every room.
And lastly, the two days preceding that on which your sisters are expected will be devoted
by Hannah and me to such a beating of eggs, sorting of currants, grating of spices,
compounding of Christmas cakes, chopping up of materials for mince pies, and solemnizing
of other culinary rites, as words can convey but an inadequate notion of to the uninitiated like you.
My purpose, in short, is to have all things in an absolutely perfect state of readiness
for Diana and Mary before next Thursday, and my ambition is to give them a bow ideal of a welcome when they come.
St. John smiled slight. Still he was dissatisfied.
It is all very well for the present, said he.
But seriously, I trust that when the first flush of vivacity is over,
you will look a little higher than domestic endearments and household joys.
The best things the world has, I interrupted.
No, Jane, no. This world is not the scene of fruition.
Do not attempt to make it so, nor of rest. Do not turn slothful.
I mean, on the contrary, to be busy.
Jane, I excuse you for the present. Two months' grace I allow you for the full enjoyment of your new position,
and for pleasing yourself with this late-found charm of relationship.
But then I hope you will begin to look beyond Morehouse and Morton, and sisterly society,
and the selfish calm and sensual comfort of civilized affluence.
I hope your energies will then once more trouble you with their strength.
I looked at him with surprise.
St. John, I said, I think you are almost wicked to talk so.
I am disposed to be as content as a queen, and you try to stir me up to restlessness.
To what end?
To the end of turning to profit the talents which God has committed to your keeping,
and of which he will surely one day demand a strict account.
Jane, I shall watch you closely and anxiously, I warn you of that,
and try to restrain the disproportionate fervour with which you throw yourself into commonplace home pleasures.
Don't cling so tenaciously to ties of the flesh.
Save your constancy and ardour for an adequate cause.
Forbear to waste them on trite, transient objects.
Do you hear, Jane?
Yes, just as if you were speaking Greek.
I feel I have adequate cause to be happy, and I will be happy.
Good-bye.
Happy at Morehouse I was, and hard I worked, and so did Hannah.
She was charmed to see how jovial I could be amidst the bustle of a house turned topsy-turvy.
How I could dust, and brush, and clean, and cook.
And really, after a day or two of confusion, worse confounded,
it was delightful, by degrees, to invoke order from the chaos ourselves had made.
I had previously taken a journey to S., to purchase some new furniture,
my cousins having given me carte blanche to effect what alterations I pleased,
and of some having been set aside for that purpose.
The ordinary sitting-room and bedrooms I left much as they were,
for I knew Diana and Mary would derive more pleasure from seeing again
the old homely tables and chairs and beds
than from the spectacle of the smartest innovations.
Still, some novelty was necessary to give their return the piquancy
with which I wished it to be invested.
Dark, handsome new carpets and curtains,
an arrangement of some carefully selected antique ornaments in porcelain and bronze,
new coverings in mirrors and dressing cases for the toilet tables,
answered the end. They looked fresh without being glaring.
A spare parlor and bedroom I refurnished entirely with old mahogany and crimson upholstery.
I laid canvas on the passage and carpets on the stairs.
When all was finished, I thought more houses complete a model
of bright, modest snugness within, as it was at this season,
a specimen of wintry waste and desert-drewiness without.
The eventful Thursday at length came. They were expected about dark,
and at our desk fires were lit upstairs and below.
The kitchen was in perfect trim. Hannah and I were dressed and all was in readiness.
St. John arrived first. I had entreated him to keep quite clear of the house
till everything was arranged.
And, indeed, the bare idea of the commotion, at once sorted and trivial,
going on within its walls, sufficed to scare him to estrangement.
He found me in the kitchen, watching the progress of certain cakes for tea, then baking.
Approaching the hearth, he asked if I was at last satisfied with housemaids' work.
I answered by inviting him to accompany me on a general inspection of the result of my labors.
With some difficulty I got him to make the tour of the house.
He just looked in at the doors I opened, and when he had wandered upstairs and downstairs
he said I must have gone through a great deal of fatigue and trouble
to have affected such considerable changes in so short a time.
But not a syllable did he utter indicating pleasure in the improved aspect of his abode.
This silence damped me. I thought perhaps the alterations had disturbed
some old associations he valued. I inquired whether this was the case,
no doubt in a somewhat crestfallen tone.
Not at all. He had, on the contrary, remarked that I had scrupulously respected every association.
He feared, indeed, I must have bestowed more thought on the matter than it was worth.
How many minutes, for instance, had I devoted to studying the arrangement of this very room?
By the by, could I tell him where such a book was?
I showed him the volume on the shelf.
He took it down, and with drawing to his accustomed window recess, he began to read it.
Now, I did not like this reader. St. John was a good man,
but I began to feel he had spoken truth of himself when he said he was hard and cold.
The humanities and amenities of life had no attraction for him.
Its peaceful enjoyments no charm.
Literally, he lived only to aspire, after what was good and great, certainly,
but still he would never rest, nor approve of others resting around him.
As I looked at his lofty forehead, still and pale as a white stone,
at his fine liniments fixed in study, I comprehended all at once that he would hardly make a good husband,
that it would be a trying thing to be his wife.
I understood, as by inspiration, the nature of his love for Miss Oliver.
I agreed with him that it was but a love of the senses.
I comprehended how he should despise himself for the feverish influence it exercised over him,
how he should wish to stifle and destroy it,
and how he should mistrust its ever-conducing permanently to his happiness, or hers.
I saw he was of the material from which nature hues her heroes,
Christian and Pagan, her lawgivers, her statesmen, her conquerors,
a steadfast bulwark for great interests to rest upon,
but at the fireside too often a cold, cumbrous column, gloomy and out of place.
This parlour is not his sphere, I reflected, the Himalayan rich or caffer bush,
even the plague-cursed Guinea Coast swamp would suit him better.
Well may he eschew the calm of domestic life, it is not his element.
There his faculties stagnate, they cannot develop or appear to advantage.
It is in scenes of strife and danger, where courage is proved,
and energy exercised, and fortitude tasked, that he will speak and move, the leader and superior.
A merry child would have the advantage of him on this hearth.
He is right to choose a missionary's career. I see it now.
They are coming, they are coming! cried Hannah, throwing open the parlour door.
At the same moment old Carlo barked joyfully. Out I ran.
It was now dark, but a rumbling of wheels was audible.
Hannah soon had a lantern lit. The vehicle had stopped at the wicket.
The driver opened the door. First one well-known form, then another, stepped out.
In a minute I had my face under their bonnets in contact first with Mary's soft cheek,
then with Diana's flowing curls. They laughed, kissed me, then Hannah,
patted Carlo, who was half-wild with delight, asked eagerly if all was well,
and being assured in the affirmative, hastened into the house.
They were stiff from their long and jolting drive from Whitcross,
and chilled with the frosty night air, but their pleasant countenances expanded to the cheerful firelight.
While the driver and Hannah brought in the boxes, they demanded St. John.
At this moment he advanced from the parlour. They both threw their arms round his neck at once.
He gave each one a quiet kiss, said in a low tone a few words of welcome,
stood awhile to be talked to, and then, intimating that he supposed they would soon rejoin him in the parlour,
withdrew there as to a place of refuge.
I had lit their candles to go upstairs, but Diana had first to give hospitable orders respecting the driver.
This done, both followed me. They were delighted with the renovation and decoration of their rooms,
with the new drapery and fresh carpets, and rich tinted china vases.
They expressed their gratification ungrudgingly.
I had the pleasure of feeling that my arrangements met their wishes exactly,
and that what I had done added a vivid charm to their joyous return home.
Sweet was that evening. My cousins, full of exhilaration, were so eloquent in narrative and comment
that their fluency covered St. John's taciturnity.
He was sincerely glad to see his sisters, but in their glow of fervour and flow of joy he could not sympathize.
The event of the day, that is, the return of Diana and Mary, pleased him.
But the accompaniments of that event, the glad tumult, the garrulous glee of reception, irked him.
I saw he wished the quieter morrow was come.
In the very meridian of the night's enjoyment, about an hour after tea, a rap was heard at the door.
Hannah entered with the intimation that
a poor lad was come at that unlikely time to fetch Mr. Rivers to see his mother, who was drawing away.
Where does she live, Hannah?
Clear up at Whitcross Brow, almost four miles off, and more and moss all the way.
Tell them I will go.
I'm sure, sir, you had better not. It's the worst road to travel after dark that can be.
There's no track at all over the bog, and then it is such a bitter night, the keenest win you ever felt.
You had better send word, sir, that you will be there in the morning.
But he was already in the passage, putting on his cloak,
and without one objection, one murmur, he departed.
It was then nine o'clock. He did not return till midnight.
Starved and tired enough he was, but he looked happier than when he set out.
He had performed an act of duty, made an exertion,
felt his own strength to do and deny, and was on better terms with himself.
I am afraid the whole of the ensuing week tried his patience.
It was Christmas week. We took no settled employment,
but spent it in a sort of married domestic dissipation.
The air of the Moors, the freedom of home, the dawn of prosperity,
acted on Diana and Mary's spirits like some life-giving elixir.
They were gay from morning till noon, from noon till night.
They could always talk, and their discourse, witty, pithy, original,
had such charms for me that I preferred listening to and sharing in it
to doing anything else. St. John did not rebuke our vivacity,
but he escaped from it. He was seldom in the house.
His parish was large, the population scattered,
and he found daily business in visiting the sick and poor in its different districts.
One morning, at breakfast, Diana, after looking a little pensive for some minutes,
asked him if his plans were yet unchanged.
Unchanged and unchangeable was the reply,
and he proceeded to inform us that his departure from England
was now definitely fixed for the ensuing year.
And Rosamond Oliver suggested Mary, the words seeming to
escape her lips involuntarily, for no sooner had she uttered them
than she made a gesture as if wishing to recall them. St. John
had a book in his hand. It was his unsocial custom to read at meals.
He closed it and looked up.
Rosamond Oliver, said he, is about to be married to Mr. Granby,
one of the best connected and most estimable residents in S.,
grandson and heir to Sir Frederick Granby.
I had the intelligence from her father yesterday.
His sisters looked at each other, and at me. We all three looked at him.
He was serene as glass.
The match must have been got up hastily, said Diana.
They cannot have known each other long.
But two months they met in October at the county ball at S.
But where there are no obstacles to a union, as in the present case,
where the connection is in every point desirable, delays are unnecessary.
They will be married as soon as S. Palace, which Sir Frederick
gives up to them, can be refitted for their reception.
The first time I found St. John alone after this communication,
I felt tempted to inquire if the event distressed him.
But he seemed so little to need sympathy, that so far from
venturing to offer him more, I experienced some shame at the
recollection of what I had already hazarded. Besides, I was out of practice
in talking to him. His reserve was again frozen over,
and my frankness was congealed beneath it. He had not kept his
promise of treating me like his sisters. He continually made little
chilling differences between us, which did not at all tend to the
development of cordiality. In short, now that I was acknowledged
his kinswoman, and lived under the same roof with him, I felt the
distance between us to be far greater than when he had known me only as the village
school mistress. When I remembered how far I had once been admitted
to his confidence, I could hardly comprehend his present frigidity.
Such being the case, I felt not a little surprised
when he raised his head suddenly from the desk, over which he was stooping,
and said, You see, Jane, the battle is fought,
and the victory won. Startled at being thus addressed,
I did not immediately reply. After a moment's hesitation I answered,
But are you sure you are not in the position
of those conquerors whose triumphs have cost them too dear?
Would not such another ruin you? I think not,
and if I were, it does not much signify. I shall never
be called upon to contend for such another. The event of the
conflict is decisive. My way is now clear. I thank God for it.
So saying, he returned to his papers in his silence.
As our mutual happiness, i.e. Diana's, Mary's, and mine,
settled into a quiet character, and we resumed our usual habits
and regular studies, St. John stayed more at home.
He sat with us in the same room, sometimes for hours together.
While Mary drew, Diana pursued a course of encyclopedic reading
she had, to my awe and amazement, undertaken,
and I fagged away at German. He pondered a mystic lore of his own,
that of some Eastern tongue, the acquisition of which he thought necessary to his
plans. Thus engaged, he appeared, sitting
in his own recess, quiet and absorbed enough. But that blue eye
of his had a habit of leaving the outlandish-looking grammar, and wandering
over, and sometimes fixing upon us, his fellow students,
with a curious intensity of observation. If caught,
it would be instantly withdrawn, yet ever and anon, it returned searchingly
to our table. I wondered what it meant. I wondered, too,
at the punctual satisfaction. He never failed to exhibit on an
occasion that seemed to me of small moment, namely, my weekly visit
to Morton School. And still more was I puzzled when,
if the day was unfavorable, if there was snow or rain or high wind,
and his sisters urged me not to go, he would invariably
make light of their solicitude, and encourage me to accomplish the task
without regard to the elements. Jane is not such a weakling
as you would make her, he would say. She can bear a mountain blast,
or a shower, or a few flakes of snow, as well as any of us.
Her constitution is both sound and elastic, better
calculated to endure variations of climate than many more robust.
And when I returned, sometimes a good deal tired, and
not a little weather-beaten, I never dared to complain, because
I saw that to murmur would be to vex him. On all occasions
fortitude pleased him. The reverse was a special annoyance.
One afternoon, however, I got leave to stay at home, because I really
had a cold. His sisters were gone to Morton in my stead.
I sat reading Schiller, he deciphering his crabbed oriental
scrolls. As I exchanged a translation for an exercise,
I happened to look his way. There I found myself under the influence
of the ever watchful blue eye. How long it had been searching
me through and through, and over and over, I cannot tell.
So keen was it, and yet so cold, I felt for the moment
superstitious, as if I were sitting in the room with something uncanny.
Jane, what are you doing?
Learning German.
I want you to give up German and learn Hindostani.
You are not in earnest.
In such earnest that I must have it so, and I will tell you why.
He then went on to explain that Hindostani was the language he himself
was at present studying, that, as he advanced, he was apt to forget
the commencement, that it would assist him greatly to have a pupil
with whom he might again and again go over the elements, and so fix them
thoroughly in his mind, that his choice had hovered for some time between
me and his sisters, but that he had fixed on me because he saw I could
sit at a task the longest of the three. Would I do him this favor?
I should not, perhaps, have to make the sacrifice long,
as it wanted now barely three months to his departure.
St. John was not a man to be lightly refused. You felt that
every impression made on him, either for pain or pleasure,
was deep-graved and permanent. I consented.
When Diana and Mary returned, the former found her scholar
transferred from her to her brother. She laughed, and both she and Mary
agreed that St. John should never have persuaded them to such a step.
He answered quietly, I know it.
I found him a very patient, very forbearing, and yet an
exacting master. He expected me to do a great deal,
and when I fulfilled his expectations, he, in his own way,
fully testified his approbation. By degrees,
he acquired a certain influence over me that took away my liberty of mind.
His praise and notice were more restraining than his indifference.
I could no longer talk or laugh freely when he was by,
because a tiresomely importunate instinct reminded me that vivacity,
at least in me, was distasteful to him.
I was so fully aware that only serious moods and occupations were acceptable
that in his presence every effort to sustain or follow
any other became vain. I fell under a freezing spell.
When he said go, I went. Come,
I came. Do this. I did it. But I did not
love my servitude. I wished many a time he had continued
to neglect me. One evening, when at bedtime, his
sisters and I stood round him, bidding him good night, he kissed each of them,
as was his custom, and, as was equally his custom, he gave me
his hand. Diana, who chanced to be in a frolicsome humor,
she was not painfully controlled by his will, for hers
in another way was as strong, exclaimed,
St. John, you used to call Jane your third sister, but you don't treat her as such.
You should kiss her, too. She pushed me towards him.
I thought Diana very provoking and felt uncomfortably confused,
and while I was thus thinking and feeling, St. John
bent his head. His Greek face was brought to a level
with mine. His eyes questioned my eyes piercingly.
He kissed me. There are no such things as marble kisses,
or ice kisses, or I should say, my ecclesiastical
cousin's salute belonged to one of these classes.
But there may be experiment kisses, and his was an experiment
kiss. When given, he viewed me to learn the result.
It was not striking. I am sure I did not blush.
Perhaps I might have turned a little pale, for I felt as if
the kiss were a seal affixed to my fetters. He never omitted
the ceremony afterwards, and the gravity and quiescence
with which I underwent it seemed to invest it for him with a certain charm.
As for me, I daily wished more to please him.
But to do so, I felt daily more and more that I must disown
half my nature, stifle half my faculties,
wrest my tastes from their original bent, force myself to the adoption
of pursuits for which I had no natural vocation. He wanted
to train me to an elevation I could never reach. It racked
me hourly to aspire to the standard he uplifted. The thing was
as impossible as to mold my irregular features to his correct and classic
pattern, to give my changeable green eyes the sea-blue
tint and solemn lester of his own. Not his ascendancy
alone, however, held me enthralled at present. Of late, it had been
easy enough for me to look sad. A cankering evil sat at my heart
and drained my happiness at its source, the evil of suspense.
Perhaps you think I had forgotten Mr. Rochester, reader,
amidst these changes of place and fortune.
Not for a moment. His idea was still with me,
because it was not a vapor sunshine could disperse, nor a
sand-traced effigy storms could wash away. It was a name
engraven on a tablet, fated to last as long as the marble
it inscribed. The craving to know what had become of him
followed me everywhere. When I was at Morton, I re-entered
my cottage every evening to think of that, and now at Morehouse
I sought my bedroom each night to brood over it.
In the course of my necessary correspondence with Mr. Briggs about the will,
I had inquired if he knew anything of Mr. Rochester's present residence
and state of health, but, as St. John had conjectured, he was quite
ignorant of all concerning him. I then wrote to Mrs. Fairfax
entreating information on the subject. I had calculated
with certainty on this step answering my end. I felt sure
it would elicit an early answer. I was astonished when a fortnight
passed without reply, but when two months wore away, and day after
day the post arrived and brought nothing for me, I fell prey to
the keenest anxiety. I wrote again.
There was a chance of my first letter having missed. Renewed hope
followed renewed effort. It shone like the former for some weeks,
then, like it, faded, flickered. Not a line,
not a word reached me. When half a year wasted
in vain expectancy, my hope died out, and then I felt
dark indeed. A fine spring shone round me, which
I could not enjoy. Summer approached. Diana tried to cheer
me. She said I looked ill, and wished to accompany me to the seaside.
This St. John opposed. He said I did not want dissipation,
I wanted employment. My present life was too purposeless.
I required a name, and, I suppose, by way of supplying deficiencies,
he prolonged still further my lessons in Hindostani,
and grew more urgent in requiring their accomplishment.
And I, like a fool, never thought of resisting him. I could not
resist him. One day I had come to my studies
in lower spirits than usual. The ebb was occasioned by a poignantly
felt disappointment. Hannah had told me in the morning there was a letter
for me, and when I went down to take it, almost certain that the long
looked-for tidings were vouchsafed me at last, I found only
an unimportant note from Mr. Briggs on business.
The bitter check had wrung for me some tears,
and now, as I sat poring over the crabbed characters of flourishing tropes
of an Indian scribe, my eyes felled again.
St. John called me to his side to read. In attempting to
do this, my voice failed me. Words were lost and sobs.
He and I were the only occupants of the parlour. Diana was practicing
her music in the drawing-room. Mary was gardening.
It was a very fine May day, clear, sunny, and breezy.
My companion expressed no surprise at this emotion,
nor did he question me as to its cause. He only said,
We will wait a few minutes, Jane, till you are more composed.
And while I smothered the paroxysm with all haste, he sat calm
and patient, leaning on his desk and looking like a physician watching with the eye
of science an expected and fully understood crisis in a patient's
malady. Having stifled my sobs, wiped my eyes,
and muttered something about not being very well that morning, I resumed
my task, and succeeded in completing it. St. John
put away my books, and his, locked his desk, and said,
Now, Jane, you shall take a walk, and with me.
I will call Diana and Mary. No.
I want only one companion this morning, and that must be you.
Put on your things, go out by the kitchen door. Take the road
towards the head of Marsh Glen. I will join you in a moment.
I know no medium. I never in my life have known any medium
in my dealings with positive hard characters, antagonistic to my own,
between absolute submission and determined revolt.
I have always faithfully observed the one up to the very moment
of bursting, sometimes with volcanic vehemence, into the other,
and as neither present circumstances warranted, nor my present
mood inclined me to mutiny, I observed careful obedience to
St. John's directions, and in ten minutes I was treading the wild
track of the Glen, side by side with him. The breeze was from the
west. It came over the hills, sweet with scents of heath and rush.
The sky was of stainless blue. The stream descending
the ravine, swelled with past spring rains, poured along plentiful
and clear, catching golden gleams from the sun and sapphire tints
from the firmament. As we advanced and left the track,
we trod a soft turf, mossy fine and emerald green,
minutely enameled with a tiny white flower, and spangled with a star-like
yellow blossom. The hills meantime shut us quite in,
for the Glen, towards its head, wound to their very core.
Let us rest here, said St. John, as we reached the first stragglers
of a battalion of rocks, guarding a sort of pass beyond which
the beck rushed down a waterfall, and where, still a little further,
the mountain shook off turf and flower, had only heath for
raiment, and crag for gem, where it exaggerated the wild
to the savage, and exchanged the fresh for the frowning,
where it guarded the forlorn hope of solitude and a last refuge
for silence. I took a seat.
St. John stood near me. He looked up the pass and down
the hollow. His glance wandered away with the stream, and turned
to traverse the unclouded heaven which colored it. He removed his
hat, let the breeze stir his hair and kiss his brow. He seemed
in communion with the genius of the haunt. With his eye he bade farewell
to something.
And I shall see it again, he said aloud, in dreams when I
sleep by the gangies, and again in a more remote hour,
when another slumber overcomes me on the shore of a darker stream.
Strange words of a strange love!
An austere patriot's passion for his fatherland!
He sat down. For half an hour we never spoke. Neither he to me
nor I to him. That interval passed. He recommends
Jane, I go in six weeks. I have taken my birth
in an East Indian inn which sails on the 20th of June.
God will protect you, for you have undertaken his work, I answered.
Yes, said he, there is my glory
and joy. I am the servant of an infallible master.
I am not going out under human guidance, subject to
the defective laws and erring control of my feeble fellow worms.
My king, my law-giver, my captain, is the all-perfect.
It seems strange to me that all round me do not burn
to enlist under the same banner, to join in the same enterprise.
All have not your powers, and it would be folly
for the feeble to wish to march with the strong.
I do not speak to the feeble, or think of them. I address
only such as are worthy of the work, and competent to accomplish it.
Those are few in number, and difficult to discover.
You say truly, but when found,
it is right to stir them up, to urge and exhort them to effort,
to show them what their gifts are, and why they were given, to speak
heaven's message in their ear, to offer them direct from God
a place in the ranks of his chosen. If they are really
qualified for the task, will not their own hearts be the first
to inform them of it? I felt as if an awful charm was
framing round and gathering over me. I trembled to hear some fatal
words spoken which would at once declare and rivet the spell.
And what does your heart say? demanded St. John.
My heart is mute, my heart is mute,
I answered, struck and thrilled. Then I must speak for it,
continued the deep, relentless voice. Jane,
come with me to India. Come as my help-meet and fellow-labourer.
The glen and sky spun round, the hills heaved.
It was as if I had heard a summons from heaven, as if a visionary messenger,
like him of Macedonia, had announced,
Come over and help us. But I was no apostle.
I could not behold the herald, I could not receive his call.
Oh, St. John, I cried, have some mercy.
I appealed to one who, in the discharge of what he believed his duty,
knew neither mercy nor remorse. He continued,
God and nature intended you for a missionary's wife.
It is not personal, but mental endowments they have given you.
You are formed for labour, not for love. A missionary's wife you must,
shall be. You shall be mine. I claim you, not for my
pleasure, but for my sovereign service. I am not fit
for it, I have no vocation, I said. He had calculated
on these first objections. He was not irritated by them.
Indeed, as he leaned back against the crag behind him, folded his
arms on his chest, and fixed his countenance, I saw he was prepared
for a long and trying opposition, and had taken in a stock of patience
to last him to its close. Resolved, however, that the clothes
should be conquest for him. Humility, Jane,
said he, is the groundwork of Christian virtues. You say
right that you are not fit for the work. Who is fit for it?
Or, who, that ever truly called, believes himself worthy
of the summons? I, for instance, am but dust and ashes.
With St. Paul, I acknowledge myself the chiefest of sinners,
but I do not suffer this sense of my personal vileness to daunt
me. I know, my leader, that he is just
as well as mighty, and while he has chosen a feeble instrument to
perform a great task, he will, from the boundless stores of his
providence, supply the inadequacy of the means to the end.
Think like me, Jane. Trust like me. It is the rock of
ages I ask you to lean on. Do not doubt, but it will bear the weight
of your human weakness. I do not understand
a missionary life. I have never studied missionary labors.
There, I, humble as I am, can give you the aid you want.
I can set your task from hour to hour, stand by you always,
help you from moment to moment. This I could do in the beginning.
Soon, for I know your powers, you would be as strong and apt
as myself, and would not require my help.
But my powers, where are they for this undertaking? I do not feel
them. Nothing speaks or stirs in me while you talk.
I am sensible of no light kindling, no life quickening,
no voice cancelling or cheering. Oh, I wish I could
make you see how much my mind is at this moment like a rayless dungeon,
with one shrinking fear fettered in its steps, the fear of
being persuaded by you to attempt what I cannot accomplish.
I have an answer for you. Hear it. I have watched
you ever since we first met. I have made you my study for
ten months. I have proved you in that time by sundry tests,
and what have I seen and elicited? In the village school I found
you could perform well, punctually, uprightly, labor,
uncongenial to your habits and inclinations. I saw you could perform
it with capacity and tact. You could win while you controlled.
In the calm with which you learnt you had become suddenly rich,
I read a mind clear of the vice of Dimah.
Lucre had no undue power over you. In the resolute readiness with
which you cut your wealth into four shares, keeping but one to yourself
and relinquishing the three others to the claim of abstract justice,
I recognized a soul that reveled in the flame and excitement of sacrifice.
In the tractability with which, at my wish,
you first took a study in which you were interested, and adopted
another because it interested me. In the untiring assiduity
with which you have since persevered in it. In the unflagging
energy and unshaken temper with which you have met its difficulties,
I acknowledge the compliment of the qualities I seek.
Jane, you are docile, diligent, disinterested,
faithful, constant, and courageous,
very gentle, and very heroic. Cease to mistrust
yourself. I can trust you unreservedly.
As a conductress of Indian schools and a helper amongst Indian women,
your assistance will be, to me, invaluable.
My iron shroud contracted round me.
Persuasion advanced with slow, sure step.
Shut my eyes as I would. These last words of his succeeded in making
the way, which had seemed blocked up, comparatively clear.
My work, which had appeared so vague, so hopelessly diffuse,
condensed itself as he proceeded, and assumed a definite form
under his shaping hand. He waited for an answer.
I demanded a quarter of an hour to think before I again hazarded a reply.
Very willingly, he rejoined, and rising,
he strode a little distance up the pass, threw himself down
on a swell of heath, and there lay still.
I can do what he wants me to do. I am forced to see and acknowledge that,
I meditated. That is, if life be spared me,
but I feel mine is not the existence to be long protracted under an
Indian son. What then? He does not care for that.
When my time came to die, he would resign me in all serenity and sanctity
to the God who gave me. The case is very
plain before me. In leaving England, I should leave a loved
but empty land. Mr. Rochester is not there.
And if he were, what is, what can that ever be
to me? My business is to live without him now,
nothing so absurd, so weak as to drag on from day to day as if
I were waiting some impossible change in circumstances,
which might reunite me to him. Of course, as St. John once
said, I must seek another interest in life to replace the one lost.
Is not the occupation he now offers me truly the most
glorious man can adopt or God assign? Is it not
by its noble cares and sublime results, the one best calculated
to fill the void left by up-torn affections and demolished hopes?
I believe I must say yes, and yet I shudder.
Alas, if I join St. John, I abandon half myself.
If I go to India, I go to premature death.
And how will the interval between leaving England for India and India for the
grave be filled? Oh, I know well. That too
is very clear to my vision. By straining to satisfy St. John till
my sinews ache, I shall satisfy him, to the finest central point
and farthest outward circle of his expectations.
If I do go with him, if I do make the sacrifice he urges,
I will make it absolutely. I will throw all on the altar,
heart, vitals, the entire victim. He will never love me,
but he shall approve me. I will show him energies
he has not seen, resources he has never suspected.
Yes, I can work as hard as he can, and with his
little grudging. Consent, then, to his demand is possible.
But for one item, one dreadful item,
it is that he asks me to be his wife, and has no more
of a husband's heart for me than that frowning giant of a rock,
down which the stream is foaming in yonder gorge. He prizes
me as a soldier with a good weapon, and that is all. Unmarried to
him, this would never grieve me. But can I let him complete
his calculations, coolly put into practice his plans,
go through the wedding ceremony? Can I receive from him
the bridal ring, endure all the forms of love, which
I doubt not he would scrupulously observe, and know that the
spirit was quite absent? Can I bear the consciousness
that every endearment he bestows is a sacrifice made on principle?
No, such a martyrdom would be monstrous. I will
never undergo it. As his sister I might accompany him,
not as his wife. I will tell him so.
I looked towards the knoll, there he lay, still as a prostrate
column. His face turned to me, his eye beaming
watchful and keen. He started to his feet and approached me.
I am ready to go to India, if I may go free.
Your answer requires a commentary, he said.
It is not clear. You have hitherto been
my adopted brother, I your adopted sister. Let us
continue as such. You and I had better not marry. He shook
his head. Adopted fraternity will not do in this case.
If you were my real sister it would be different. I should take
you and seek no wife. But, as it is, either our union
must be consecrated and sealed by marriage, or it cannot exist.
Practical obstacles oppose themselves to any other plan.
Do you not see it, Jane? Consider a moment. Your strong
sense will guide you. I did consider, and
still my sense, such as it was, directed me only to the fact that we did
not love each other as man and wife should, and therefore
it inferred we ought not to marry. I said so.
St. John, I returned, I regard you as a brother, you me as a sister.
So let us continue. We cannot, we cannot,
he answered with short, sharp determination. It would not
do. You have said you will go with me to India. Remember, you have said
that. Conditionally. Well, well,
to the main point, the departure with me from England,
the cooperation with me and my future labors. You do not object.
You have already as good as put your hand to the plow. You are
too consistent to withdraw it. You have but one end to keep in view,
how the work you have undertaken can best be done.
Simplify your complicated interests, feelings, thoughts, wishes, aims.
Merge all considerations in one purpose, that
of fulfilling with effect, with power, the mission of your great
master. To do so you must have a coadjutor,
not a brother, that is a loose tie, but a husband.
I too do not want a sister. A sister might any day be taken
from me. I want a wife, the sole help-meat
I can influence efficiently in life and retain absolutely
till death. I shuddered as he spoke, I felt
his influence in my marrow, his hold on my limbs.
Seek one elsewhere than in me, St. John, seek one fitted
to you. One fitted to my purpose you mean,
fitted to my vocation. Again I tell you, it is not
the insignificant private individual, the mere man with the man's
selfish senses I wish to mate. It is a missionary.
And I will give the missionary my energies. It is all he
wants, but not myself. That would be only adding the husk and shell
to the kernel. For them he has no use. I retain them.
You cannot, you ought not. Do you think God will be satisfied
with half an oblation? Will he accept a mutilated
sacrifice? It is the cause of God, I advocate. It is
under his standard, I enlist you. I cannot accept on his behalf
a divided allegiance. It must be entire.
Oh, I will give my heart to God, I said. You do not want it.
I will not swear, reader, that there was not something of repressed
sarcasm both in the tone in which I uttered this sentence,
and in the feeling that accompanied it. I had silently feared
St. John till now, because I had not understood him.
He had held me in awe, because he had held me in doubt.
How much of him was saint, how much mortal, I could not hear to
foretell. But revelations were being made in this conference.
The analysis of his nature was proceeding before my eyes.
I saw his fallibilities. I comprehended them.
I understood that, sitting there, where I did, on the bank of Heath,
and with that handsome form before me, I sat at
the feet of a man, erring his eye. The veil fell
from his hardness and despotism. Having felt in him the presence
of these qualities, I felt his imperfection, and took courage.
I was with an equal, one with whom I might argue,
one whom, if I saw good, I might resist.
He was silent after I had uttered the last sentence, and I presently
risked an upward glance at his countenance. His eye bent on me,
expressed at once stern surprise and keen inquiry.
Is she sarcastic, and sarcastic to me,
it seemed to say. What does this signify?
Do not let us forget that this is a solemn matter,
he said ere long, one of which we may neither think
nor talk lightly without sin. I trust, Jane, you are
in earnest when you say you will give your heart to God. It is all I want.
Once wrench your heart from man, and fix it on your
Maker. The advancement of that Maker's spiritual kingdom on earth
will be your chief delight and endeavor. You will be ready to do at
once whatever furthers that end. You will see what impetus
would be given to your efforts and mind by our physical and mental union
in marriage, the only union that gives a character of permanent conformity
to the destinies and designs of human beings.
And passing over all minor compresses, all trivial
difficulties and delicacies of feeling, all scruple about the degree,
kind, strength, or tenderness of mere personal inclination,
you will hasten to enter into that union at once.
Shall I, I said briefly, and I looked at his features, beautiful in their
harmony, but strangely formidable in their still severity,
at his brow, commanding but not open, at his eyes,
bright and deep, and searching, but never soft, at his tall
imposing figure, and fancied myself an idea,
his wife. Oh, it would never do,
as his curate, his comrade, all would be right. I would cross
oceans with him in that capacity, toil under eastern suns
in Asian deserts with him in that office, admire and
emulate his courage and devotion and vigor, accommodate quietly
to his masterhood, smile undisturbed at his ineradicable
ambition, discriminate the Christian from the man,
profoundly esteem the one, and freely forgive the other.
I should suffer often, no doubt, attached to him only in this capacity,
my body would be under rather a stringent yoke,
but my heart and mind would be free. I should still have
my unbladed self to turn to, my natural unenslaved
feelings with which to communicate in moments of loneliness.
There would be recesses in my mind which would be only mine, to which
he never came, and sentiments growing there fresh and sheltered,
which his austerity could never blight, nor his measured warrior march
trampled down. But as his wife, at his side always,
and always restrained and always checked, forced to keep the fire of
my nature continually low, to compel it to burn inwardly and never
utter a cry, though the imprisoned flame consumed vital after
vital, this would be unendurable.
St. John, I exclaimed, when I had got so far in my meditation.
Well? he answered icily.
I repeat, I freely consent to go with you as your fellow missionary,
but not as your wife. I cannot marry you and become part of you.
A part of me you must become, he answered steadily.
Otherwise the whole bargain is void.
How can I, a man not yet thirty, take out with me to India
a girl of nineteen, unless she be married to me?
How can we be forever together, sometimes in solitudes,
sometimes amidst savage tribes and unwed?
Very well, I said shortly, under the circumstances, quite as
well as if I were either your real sister, or a man and a clergyman
like yourself. It is known that you are not my sister.
I cannot introduce you as such. To attempt it would be to fasten
injurious suspicions on us both. And for the rest,
though you have a man's vigorous brain, you have a woman's heart.
And it would not do.
It would do, I affirmed with some disdain, perfectly well. I have a woman's heart,
but not where you are concerned. For you I have only a comrade's
constancy, a fellow soldier's frankness, fidelity, fraternity,
if you like, a neophyte's respect and submission to his
hierophant. Nothing more. Don't fear.
It is what I want, he said, speaking to himself.
It is just what I want, and there are obstacles in the way.
They must be hewn down. Jane, you would not repent
marrying me, be certain of that. We must be married.
I repeat it. There is no other way, and undoubtedly
enough of love would follow upon marriage to render the union right
even in your eyes. I scorn your idea of love.
I could not help saying, as I rose up and stood before him,
leaning my back against the rock, I scorn the counterfeit
sentiment you offer. Yes, St. John, I scorn you when you offer it.
He looked at me fixedly, compressing
his well-cut lips while he did so. Whether he was
incensed or surprised, or what, it was not easy to tell.
He could command his countenance thoroughly.
I scarcely expected to hear that expression
from you, he said. I think I have done
and uttered nothing to deserve scorn.
I was touched by his gentle tone, and overawed by his high, calm
mind. Forgive me the words, St. John,
but it is your own fault that I have been roused to speak so unguardedly.
You have introduced a topic on which our natures are at variance,
a topic we should never discuss. The very name of love
is an apple of discord between us. If the reality were
required, what should we do? How should we feel?
My dear cousin, abandon your scheme of marriage. Forget it.
No, said he. It is a long, cherished
scheme, and the only one which can secure my great end.
But I shall urge you no further at present. Tomorrow I leave
home for Cambridge. I have many friends there to whom I should wish
to say farewell. I shall be absent to fortnight.
Take that space of time to consider my offer, and do not forget
that if you reject it, it is not me you deny, but God.
Through my means, he opens to you a noble career,
as my wife only can you enter upon it.
Refuse to be my wife, and you limit yourself forever to
a track of selfish ease and barren obscurity.
Trumble, lest in that case you should be numbered with those who have denied
the faith, and are worse than infidels.
He had done. Turning for me, he once
more looked to the river, looked to hill. But this time
his feelings were all pent in his heart. I was not worthy to hear
them uttered. As I walked by his side homeward, I read
well in his iron silence all he felt towards me. The disappointment
of an austere and despotic nature, which has met resistance where
it expected submission, the disapprobation of a cool and flexible
judgment, which has detected in another feelings and views in which
it has no power to sympathize. In short, as a man,
he would have wished to coerce me into obedience. It was only
as a sincere Christian he bore so patiently with my perversity, and
allowed so long a space for reflection and repentance.
That night, after he had kissed his sisters, he thought proper to forget
even to shake hands with me, but left the room in silence.
I, who though I had no love, had much friendship for him.
I was hurt by the marked omission.
So much hurt that tears started to my eyes.
I see you and St. John have been quarreling, Jane, said Diana, during
your walk on the moor. But go after him. He is now lingering in the passage
expecting you. He will make it up.
I have not much pride under such circumstances. I would always
rather be happy than dignified, and I ran after him. He stood
at the foot of the stairs.
Good night, St. John, said I.
Good night, Jane, he replied calmly.
Then shake hands, I added. What a cold, loose
touch he impressed on my fingers. He was deeply displeased
by what had occurred that day. Corgeality would not warm,
nor tears move him. No happy reconciliation was to
be had with him. No cheering smile or generous word.
But still the Christian was patient and placid, and when I asked
him if he forgave me, he answered that he was not in the habit of
cherishing the remembrance of vexation, that he had nothing to
give, not having been offended. And with that answer he left me.
I would much rather he had knocked me down.
35.
He did not leave for Cambridge the next day, as he had said he would.
He deferred his departure a whole week, and during that time he made me feel what severe punishment a good yet stern and conscientious, yet implacable man can inflict on one who has offended him.
Without one overt act of hostility, one abrading word, he contrived to impress me momently with the conviction that I was put beyond the pale of his favor.
Not that St. John harbored a spirit of unchristian vindictiveness, not that he would have injured a hair of my head if it had been fully in his power to do so.
Both by nature and principle, he was superior to the mean gratification of vengeance.
He had forgiven me for saying I scorned him and his love, but he had not forgotten the words, and as long as he and I lived, he never would forget them.
I saw by his look when he turned to me that they were always written on the air between him and me, whenever I spoke they sounded in my voice to his ear, and their echo toned every answer he gave me.
He did not abstain from conversing with me. He even called me as usual each morning to join him at his desk, and I fear the corrupt man within him had a pleasure unimparted to and unshared by the pure Christian, in evincing with what skill he could, while acting and speaking apparently just as usual, extract from every deed and every phrase the spirit of interest and approval which had formerly communicated a certain austere charm to his language and manner.
To me he was in reality become no longer flesh but marble. His eye was a cold bright blue gem, his tongue a speaking instrument, nothing more.
All this was torture to me, refined lingering torture. It kept up a slow fire of indignation and a trembling trouble of grief which harassed and crushed me altogether.
I felt how, if I were his wife, this good man, pure as the deep sunless source, could soon kill me, without drawing from my veins a single drop of blood or receiving on his own crystal conscience the faintest stain of crime.
Especially I felt this when I made any attempt to propitiate him. No Ruth met my Ruth. He experienced no suffering from estrangement, no yearning after reconciliation, and though more than once my fast falling tears blistered the page over which we both bent, they produced no more effect on him than if his heart had been really a matter of stone or metal.
To his sisters meantime he was somewhat kinder than usual, as if afraid that mere coldness would not sufficiently convince me how completely I was banished and banned. He added the force of contrast. And this I am sure he did not by malice but on principle.
The night before he left home, happening to see him walking in the garden about sunset, and remembering, as I looked at him, that this man, alienated as he now was, had once saved my life and that we were near relations, I was moved to make a last attempt to regain his friendship. I went out and approached him as he stood leaning over the little gate. I spoke to the point at once.
St. John, I am unhappy because you are still angry with me. Let us be friends.
I hope we are friends, was the unmoved reply while he still watched the rising of the moon, which he had been contemplating as I approached. No, St. John, we are not friends as we were. You know that.
Are we not? That is wrong. For my part I wish you no ill and all good.
I believe you, St. John, for I am sure you are incapable of wishing any one ill. But, as I am your kinswoman, I should desire somewhat more of affection than that sort of general philanthropy you extend to mere strangers.
Of course, he said, your wish is reasonable, and I am far from regarding you as a stranger.
This, spoken in a cool, tranquil tone, was mortifying and baffling enough. Had I attended to the suggestions of pride and ire, I should immediately have left him. But something worked within me more strongly than those feelings could.
I deeply venerated my cousin's talent and principle. His friendship was of value to me. To lose it tried me severely. I would not so soon relinquish the attempt to reconquer it.
Must we part in this way, St. John? And when you go to India, will you leave me so, without a kinder word than you have yet spoken?
He now turned quite from the moon and faced me.
When I go to India, Jane, will I leave you? What, do you not go to India?
You said I could not unless I married you.
And you will not marry me? You adhere to that resolution?
Reader, do you know, as I do, what terror those cold people can put into the ice of their questions? How much of the fall of the avalanche is in their anger? Of the breaking up of the frozen sea and their displeasure?
No, St. John, I will not marry you. I adhere to my resolution.
The avalanche had shaken and slid a little forward, but it did not yet crash down.
Once more, why this refusal? He asked.
Formerly, I answered, because you did not love me. Now, I replied, because you almost hate me. If I were to marry you, you would kill me. You are killing me now.
His lips and cheeks turned white, quite white.
I should kill you? I am killing you?
Your words are such as ought not to be used, violent, unfeminine, and untrue. They betray an unfortunate state of mind. They merit severe reproof. They would seem inexcusable, but that it is the duty of man to forgive his fellow, even until seventy and seven times.
I had finished the business now. While earnestly wishing to erase from his mind the trace of my former offence, I had stamped on that tenacious surface another and far deeper impression. I had burnt it in.
Now you will indeed hate me, I said. It is useless to attempt to conciliate you. I see I have made an eternal enemy of you.
A fresh wrong did these words inflict, the worst because they touched on the truth. That bloodless lip quivered to a temporary spasm. I knew the steely ire I had whetted. I was heart-rung.
You utterly misinterpret my words, I said at once, seizing his hand. I have no intention to grieve or pain you. Indeed, I have not.
Most bitterly he smiled. Most decidedly, he withdrew his hand from mine.
And now you recall your promise, and will not go to India at all, I presume, said he after a considerable pause.
Yes, I will, as your assistant, I answered.
A very long silence succeeded. What struggle there was in him between nature and grace in this interval I cannot tell.
Only singular gleams scintillated in his eyes, and strange shadows passed over his face. He spoke at last.
I before proved to you the absurdity of a single woman of your age proposing to accompany abroad a single man of mine.
I proved it to you in such terms as I should have thought would have prevented your ever again alluding to the plan. That you have done so I regret for your sake.
I interrupted him. Anything like a tangible reproach gave me courage at once.
Keep to common sense, St. John, you are verging on nonsense. You pretend to be shocked by what I have said.
You are not really shocked, for with your superior mind you cannot be either so dull or so conceited as to misunderstand my meaning.
I say again, I will be your curate, if you like, but never your wife.
Again he turned lividly pale, but as before controlled his passion perfectly. He answered emphatically but calmly.
A female curate who is not my wife would never suit me. With me then it seems you cannot go.
But if you are sincere in your offer, I will while in town speak to a married missionary whose wife needs a coadjutor.
Your own fortune will make you independent of the society's aid, and thus you may still be spared the dishonor of breaking your promise and deserting the band you engage to join.
Now, I never had, as the reader knows, either given any formal promise or entered into any engagement, and this language was all much too hard and much too despotic for the occasion.
I replied, There is no dishonor, no breach of promise, no desertion in the case. I am not under the slightest obligation to go to India, especially with strangers.
With you I would have ventured much, because I admire, confide in, and as a sister I love you.
But I am convinced that, go when and with whom I would, I should not live long in that climate.
Ah, you are afraid of yourself, he said, curling his lip.
I am. God did not give me my life to throw away, and to do, as you would wish me, would, I begin to think, be almost equivalent to committing suicide.
Moreover, before I definitely resolve on quitting England, I will know for certain whether I cannot be of greater use by remaining in it than by leaving it.
What do you mean?
It would be fruitless to attempt to explain, but there is a point on which I have long endured painful doubt, and I can go nowhere till by some means that doubt is removed.
I know where your heart turns, and to what it clings. The interest you cherish is lawless and unconsecrated. Long since you ought to have crushed it. Now you should blush to allude to it. You think of Mr. Rochester?
It was true. I confessed it by silence.
Are you going to seek Mr. Rochester?
I must find out what has become of him.
It remains for me then, he said, to remember you in my prayers, and to entreat God for you, in all earnestness, that you may not indeed become a castaway.
I had thought I recognized in you one of the Chosen, but God sees not as man sees. His will be done.
He opened the gate, passed through it, and strayed away down the Glen. He was soon out of sight.
On re-entering the parlour, I found Diana standing at the window, looking very thoughtful.
Diana was a great deal taller than I. She put her hand on my shoulder, and stooping, examined my face.
Jane, she said, you are always agitated and pale now. I am sure there is something the matter.
Tell me what business St. John and you have on hand.
I have watched you this half hour from the window. You must forgive my being such a spy, but for a long time I have fancied I hardly know what. St. John is a strange being.
She paused. I did not speak. Soon she resumed.
That brother of mine cherishes peculiar views of some sort respecting you, I am sure. He has long distinguished you by a notice and interest he never showed to any one else.
To what end? I wish he loved you, does he, Jane?
I put her cool hand to my hot forehead. No die, not one wit.
Then why does he follow you so with his eyes, and get you so frequently alone with him, and keep you so continually at his side?
Mary and I had both concluded he wished you to marry him.
He does. He has asked me to be his wife.
Diana clapped her hands. That is just what we hoped and thought. And you will marry him, Jane, won't you? And then he will stay in England.
Far from that, Diana. His sole idea in proposing to me is to procure a fitting fellow-labourer in his Indian toils.
What? He wishes you to go to India?
Yes.
Madness, she exclaimed. You would not live three months there, I am certain. You shall never go. You have not consented, have you, Jane?
I have refused to marry him.
And have consequently displeased him, she suggested.
Deeply. He will never forgive me, I fear. Yet I offered to accompany him as his sister.
It was frantic folly to do so, Jane. Think of the task you undertook, one of incessant fatigue, where fatigue kills even the strong. And you are weak.
St. John, you know him, would urge you to impossibilities. With him there would be no permission to rest during the hot hours, and unfortunately I have noticed, whatever he exacts, you force yourself to perform.
I am astonished you found courage to refuse his hand.
You do not love him, then, Jane?
Not as a husband.
Yet he is a handsome fellow.
And I am so plain, you see, Di. We should never suit.
Plain? You? Not at all. You are much too pretty, as well as too good, to be grilled alive in Calcutta.
And again she earnestly conjured me to give up all thoughts of going out with her brother.
I must indeed, I said, for when just now I repeated the offer of serving him for a deacon, he expressed himself shocked at my want of decency.
He seemed to think I had committed an impropriety in proposing to accompany him unmarried, as if I had not from the first hoped to find in him a brother, and habitually regarded him as such.
What makes you say he does not love you, Jane?
You should hear himself on the subject. He has again and again explained that it is not himself, but his office he wishes to mate.
He has told me I am formed for labor, not for love, which is true, no doubt.
But, in my opinion, if I am not formed for love, it follows that I am not formed for marriage.
Would it not be strange, Di, to be chained for life to a man who regarded one but as a useful tool?
Insupportable, unnatural, out of the question.
And then, I continued, though I have only sisterly affection for him now, yet, if forced to be his wife, I can imagine the possibility of conceiving an inevitable strange, torturing kind of love for him,
because he is so talented, and there is often a certain heroic grandeur in his look, manner, and conversation.
In that case, my lot would become unspeakably wretched.
He would not want me to love him, and if I showed the feeling, he would make me sensible that it was a superfluity unrequired by him, unbecoming in me.
I know he would.
And yet St. John is a good man, said Diana.
He is a good and a great man, but he forgets pitilessly the feelings and claims of little people in pursuing his own large views.
It is better, therefore, for the insignificant to keep out of his way, lest in his progress he should trample them down.
Here he comes. I will leave you, Diana.
And I hastened upstairs as I saw him entering the garden.
But I was forced to meet him again at supper.
During that meal he appeared just as composed as usual.
I had thought he would hardly speak to me, and I was certain he had given up the pursuit of his matrimonial scheme.
The sequel showed I was mistaken on both points.
He addressed me precisely in his ordinary manner, or what had, of late, been his ordinary manner, one scrupulously polite.
No doubt he had invoked the help of the Holy Spirit to subdue the anger I had roused in him, and now believed he had forgiven me once more.
For the evening reading before prayers, he selected the twenty-first chapter of Revelation.
It was at all times pleasant to listen, while from his lips fell the words of the Bible.
Never did his fine voice sound at once so sweet and full.
Never did his manner become so impressive in its noble simplicity as when he delivered the Oracles of God.
And to-night that voice took a more solemn tone, that manner a more thrilling meaning, as he sat in the midst of his household circle,
the May moon shining in through the uncurtain window, and rendering almost unnecessary the light of the candle on the table.
As he sat there, bending over the great old Bible, and described from its page the vision of the new heaven and the new earth,
told how God would come to dwell with men, how He would wipe away all tears from their eyes, and promised that there should be no more death,
neither sorrow, nor crying, nor any more pain, because the former things were passed away.
The succeeding words thrilled me strangely as he spoke them, especially as I felt by the slight indescribable alteration in sound,
that in uttering them his eye had turned on me.
He that overcometh shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my son, but, was slowly distinctly read,
the fearful, the unbelieving, etc., shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.
Henceforward I knew what fate St. John feared for me.
A calm, subdued triumph, blent with a longing earnestness, marked his enunciation of the last glorious verses of that chapter.
The reader believed his name was already written in the Lamb's Book of Life, and he yearned after the hour which should admit him to the city
to which the kings of the earth bring their glory and honor, which has no need of sun or moon to shine in it,
because the glory of God lightens it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.
In the prayer following the chapter, all his energy gathered, all his stern zeal awoke.
He was in deep earnest, wrestling with God and resolved on a conquest.
He supplicated strength for the weak-hearted, guidance for wanderers from the fold,
a return, even at the eleventh hour, for those whom the temptations of the world and the flesh were luring from the narrow path.
He asked, he urged, he claimed the boon of a brand snatched from the burning.
Earnestness is ever deeply solemn.
First, as I listened to that prayer, I wondered at his.
Then, when it continued in rows, I was touched by it, and at last awed.
He felt the greatness and goodness of his purpose so sincerely.
Others who heard him plead for it could not but feel it too.
The prayer over, we took leave of him.
He was to go at a very early hour in the morning.
Diana and Mary, having kissed him, left the room, in compliance, I think, with a whispered hint from him.
I tendered my hand and wished him a pleasant journey.
Thank you, Jane. As I said, I shall return from Cambridge in a fortnight.
That space, then, is left you for reflection.
If I listen to human pride, I should say no more to you of marriage with me.
But I listen to my duty, and keep steadily in view my first aim, to do all things to the glory of God.
My master was long-suffering, so will I be.
I cannot give you up to perdition as a vessel of wrath.
Repent, resolve while there is yet time.
Remember, we are bid to work while it is day.
Warned that the night cometh when no man shall work.
Remember the fate of Dives, who had his good things in this life.
God give you strength to choose that better part which shall not be taken from you.
He laid his hand on my head as he uttered the last words.
He had spoken earnestly, mildly.
His look was not, indeed, that of a lover beholding his mistress.
But it was that of a pastor recalling his wandering sheep,
or better, of a guardian angel watching the soul for which he is responsible.
All men of talent, whether they be men of feeling or not,
whether they be zealots, or aspirants, or despots,
provided only they be sincere, have their sublime moments,
when they subdue and rule.
I felt veneration for St. John, veneration so strong
that its impetus thrust me at once to the point I had so long shunned.
I was tempted to see struggling with him,
to rush down the torrent of his will into the gulf of his existence,
and there lose my own.
I was almost as hard beset by him now
as I had been once before in a different way by another.
I was a fool both times.
To have yielded then would have been an error of principle.
To have yielded now would have been an error of judgment.
So I think at this hour, when I look back to the crisis
through the quiet medium of time,
I was unconscious of folly at the instant.
I stood motionless under my hierophant's touch.
My refusals were forgotten, my fears overcome,
my wrestlings paralyzed.
Everything that was possible, i.e. my marriage with St. John,
was fast becoming the possible.
All was changing utterly with a sudden sweep.
Religion called, angels beckoned, God commanded,
life rolled together like a scroll,
death's gates opening, showed eternity beyond.
It seemed that for safety and bliss there,
all here might be sacrificed in a second.
The dim room was full of visions.
Could you decide now? asked the missionary.
The inquiry was put in gentle tones.
He drew me to him gently.
Oh, that gentleness, how far more potent is it than force.
I could resist St. John's wrath.
I grew pliant as a reed under his kindness.
Yet I knew all the time, if I yielded now,
I should not the less be made to repent some day of my former rebellion.
His nature was not changed,
by one hour of solemn prayer.
It was only elevated.
I could decide if I were but certain, I answered,
were I but convinced that it is God's will I should marry you.
I could vow to marry you here and now, come afterwards what would.
My prayers are heard, ejaculated St. John.
He pressed his hand firmer on my head, as if he claimed me.
He surrounded me with his arm, almost as if he loved me.
I say almost, I knew the difference,
for I had felt what it was to be loved.
But, like him, I had now put love out of the question,
and thought only of duty.
I contended with my inward dimness of vision,
before which clouds yet rolled.
I sincerely, deeply, fervently longed to do what was right, and only that.
Show me, show me the path, I entreated of heaven.
I was excited more than I had ever been,
and whether what followed was the effect of excitement the reader shall judge.
All the house was still,
for I believe all, except St. John and myself, were now retired to rest.
The one candle was dying out.
The room was full of moonlight.
My heart beat fast and thick.
I heard its throb.
Suddenly it stood still to an inexpressible feeling that thrilled it through,
and passed at once to my head and extremities.
The feeling was not like an electric shock,
but it was quite as sharp, as strange, as startling.
It acted on my senses, as if their utmost activity,
hitherto had been but torpor,
from which they were now summoned and forced to wake.
They rose expectant.
Eye and ear waited, while the flesh quivered on my bones.
What have you heard, what do you see?
asked St. John.
I saw nothing, but I heard a voice somewhere cry.
Jane, Jane, Jane.
Nothing more.
Oh God, what is it? I gasped.
I might have said, where is it?
For it did not seem in the room,
nor in the house, nor in the garden.
It did not come out of the air, nor from under the earth, nor from overhead.
I had heard it, where or whence, forever impossible to know.
And it was the voice of a human being,
a known, loved, well-remembered voice,
that of Edward Fairfax, Rochester.
And it spoke in pain and woe wildly, eerily, urgently.
I am coming, I cried. Wait for me. Oh, I will come.
I flew to the door and looked into the passage.
It was dark. I ran out into the garden.
It was void.
Where are you? I exclaimed.
The hills beyond Marsh Glen sent the answer faintly back.
Where are you?
I listened.
The wind sighed low in the firs.
All was moorland loneliness and midnight hush.
Down superstition I commented as that spectre rose up black,
by the black yew at the gate.
This is not thy deception, not thy witchcraft.
It is the work of nature.
She was aroused and did no miracle but her best.
I broke from St. John, who had followed, and would have detained me.
It was my time to assume ascendancy.
My powers were in play and in force.
I told him to forbear question or remark.
I desired him to leave me.
I must and would be alone.
He obeyed at once.
Where there is energy to command well enough, obedience never fails.
I mounted to my chamber, locked myself in, fell on my knees, and prayed in my way.
A different way to St. John's, but effective in its own fashion.
I seemed to penetrate very near a mighty spirit, and my soul rushed out in gratitude at his feet.
I rose from the thanksgiving, took a resolve, and lay down, unscared, enlightened, eager but for the daylight.
The daylight came.
I rose at dawn.
I busied myself for an hour or two with arranging my things in my
chamber, drawers, and wardrobe, in the order wherein I should wish
to leave them during a brief absence.
Meantime, I heard St. John quit his room.
He stopped at my door.
I feared he would knock.
No, but a slip of paper was passed under the door.
I took it up.
It bore these words.
You left me too suddenly last night.
Had you stayed but a little longer, you would have laid your
hand on the Christian's cross and the angel's crown.
I shall expect your clear decision when I return this day
fortnight.
Meantime, watch and pray that you enter not into temptation.
The spirit I trust is willing, but the flesh I see is weak.
I shall pray for you hourly.
Yours, St. John.
My spirit, I answered mentally, is willing to do what is right.
And my flesh, I hope, is strong enough to accomplish the will
of heaven, when once that will is distinctly known to me.
At any rate, it shall be strong enough to search, inquire, to
grope an outlet from this crowd of doubt, and find the open day
of certainty.
It was the first of June, yet the morning was overcast and
chilly.
Rain beat fast on my casement.
I heard the front door open and St. John pass out.
Looking through the window, I saw him traverse the garden.
He took the way over the Misty Moors in the direction of
Whitcross.
There he would meet the coach.
In a few more hours, I shall succeed you in that track,
cousin, I thought.
I, too, have a coach to meet at Whitcross.
I, too, have some to see and ask after in England before I
depart for ever.
It wanted yet two hours of breakfast time.
I filled the interval in walking softly about my room and
pondering the visitation which had given my plans their
present bent.
I recalled that inward sensation I had experienced, for I
could recall it with all its unspeakable strangeness.
I recalled the voice I had heard.
Again I questioned whence it came, as vainly as before.
It seemed in me, not in the external world.
I asked, was it a mere nervous impression, a delusion?
I could not conceive or believe.
It was more like an inspiration.
The wondrous shock of feeling had come like the earthquake
which shook the foundations of Paul and Silas's prison.
It had opened the doors of the soul's cell
and loosed its bands.
It had wakened it out of its sleep, once it sprang
trembling, listening, aghast.
Then vibrated thrice a cry on my startled ear, and in my
quaking heart, and through my spirit, which neither feared
nor shook, but exalted as if in joy over the success of one
effort it had been privileged to make, independent of the
cumbrous body.
Ere many days, I said, as I terminated my musings, I will know
something of him whose voice seemed last night to summon me.
Letters have proved of no avail.
Personal inquiry shall replace them.
At breakfast I announced to Diana and Mary that I was going a
journey, and should be absent at least for days.
Alone, Jane?
They asked.
Yes, it was to see or hear news of a friend about whom I had
for some time been uneasy.
They might have said, as I have no doubt they thought, that
they had believed me to be without any friends save them,
for indeed I had often said so.
But with their true natural delicacy they abstained from
comment, except that Diana asked me if I was sure I was
well enough to travel.
I looked very pale, she observed.
I replied that nothing ailed me save anxiety of mind, which I
hoped soon to alleviate.
It was easy to make my further arrangements, for I was
troubled with no inquiries, no surmises.
Having once explained to them that I could not now be
explicit about my plans, they kindly and wisely acquiesced in
the silence with which I pursued them.
According to me the privilege of free action I should, under
similar circumstances, have accorded them.
I left Morehouse at three o'clock p.m., and soon after four I
stood at the foot of the signpost of Whitcross, waiting the
arrival of the coach which was to take me to distant
Thornfield.
Amidst the silence of those solitary roads and desert hills I
heard it approach from a great distance.
It was the same vehicle whence, a year ago, I had alighted one
summer evening on this very spot.
How desolate, how hopeless, and objectless!
It stopped as I beckoned.
I entered, not now obliged to part with my whole fortune as the
price of its accommodation.
Once more, on the road to Thornfield, I felt like the
messenger pigeon flying home.
It was a journey of six and thirty hours.
I had set out from Whitcross on a Tuesday afternoon, and early on
the succeeding Thursday morning the coach stopped to water the
horses at a wayside inn, situated in the midst of scenery,
whose green hedges and large fields, and low pastoral hills,
how mild the feature and verdant of hue compared with the stern
North Midland moors of Morton, met my eye like the liniments of a
whence familiar face.
Yes, I knew the character of this landscape.
I was sure we were near my bourn.
How far is Thornfield Hall from here?
I asked of the ossler.
Just two miles, ma'am, cross the fields.
My journey is closed, I thought to myself.
I got out of the coach, gave a box I had into the ossler's
charge to be kept till I called for it, paid my fare, satisfied
the coachman, and was going.
The brightening day gleamed on the sign of the inn, and I read
in gilt letters the Rochester Arms.
My heart leapt up.
I was already on my master's very lands.
It fell again.
The thought struck it.
Your master himself may be beyond the British channel, for ought
you know.
And then, if he is at Thornfield Hall, towards which you hasten,
who besides him is there?
His lunatic wife.
And you have nothing to do with him.
You dare not speak to him or seek his presence.
You have lost your labor.
You had better go no farther, urged the monitor.
Ask information of the people at the inn.
They can give you all you seek.
They can solve your doubts at once.
Go up to that man, and inquire if Mr. Rochester be at home.
The suggestion was sensible, and yet I could not force myself to
act on it.
I so dreaded a reply that would crush me with despair.
To prolong doubt was to prolong hope.
I might yet once more see the hall under the ray of her star.
There was the stile before me, the very fields through which I
hurried, blind, deaf, distracted, with a revengeful fury tracking
and scourging me, on the morning I fled from Thornfield.
ere I well knew what course I had resolved to take, I was in the
midst of them.
How fast I walked.
How I ran sometimes.
How I looked forward to catch the first view of the well-known
woods.
With what feelings I welcomed single trees I knew, and familiar
glimpses of meadow and hill between them.
At last the woods rose.
The rookery clustered dark.
A loud calling broke the morning stillness.
Strange delight inspired me.
On I hastened.
Another field crossed, a lane threaded, and there were the
courtyard walls, the back offices, the house itself.
The rookery still hid.
My first view of it shall be in front, I determined, where its
bold battlements will strike the eye nobly at once, and where I can
single out my master's very window.
Perhaps he will be standing at it.
He rises early.
Perhaps he is now walking in the orchard, or on the pavement in
front.
Could I but see him but a moment?
Surely in that case I should not be so mad as to rend to him?
I cannot tell.
I am not certain.
And if I did, what then?
God bless him, what then?
Who would be hurt by my once more tasting the life his glance can
give me?
I rave.
Perhaps at this moment he is watching the sunrise over the
Pyrenees, or on the tideless sea of the south.
I had coasted along the lower wall of the orchard, turned its
angle.
There was a gate just there, opening into the meadow, between
two stone pillars crowned by stone balls.
From behind one pillar, I could peep round quietly at the full
front of the mansion.
I advanced my head with precaution, desirous to ascertain if any
bedroom window-blinds were yet drawn up.
Battlements, windows, long front, all from the sheltered station
were at my command.
The crows sailing overhead perhaps watched me while I took
this survey.
I wonder what they thought.
They must have considered I was very careful and timid at first,
and that gradually I grew very bold and reckless.
A peep, and then a long stare, and then a departure from my
niche, and a straying out into the meadow, and a sudden stop full
in front of the great mansion, and a protracted, hearty gaze
towards it.
What affectation of diffidence was this at first?
They might have demanded.
What stupid regardlessness now?
Here an illustration reader.
A lover finds his mistress asleep on a mossy bank.
He wishes to catch a glimpse of her fair face without waking her.
He stills softly over the grass, careful to make no sound.
He pauses, fancying she has stirred.
He withdraws.
Not for worlds would he be seen.
All is still.
He again advances.
He bends over her.
A light veil rests on her features.
He lifts it, bends lower.
Now his eyes anticipate the vision of beauty, warm and blooming,
and lovely and rest.
How hurried was their first glance, but how they fix.
How he starts.
How he suddenly and vehemently clasps in both arms the form he
dared not a moment since touch with his finger.
How he calls aloud a name and drops his burden and gazes on it
wildly, he thus grasps and cries and gazes, because he no longer
fears to waken by any sound he can utter, by any movement he can
make.
He thought his love slept sweetly.
He finds she is stone dead.
I looked with timorous joy towards a stately house.
I saw a blackened ruin.
No need to cower behind a gate-post, indeed, to peep up at
chamber lattices, fearing life was a stir behind them.
No need to listen for doors opening, to fancy steps on the
pavement, or the gravel walk.
The lawn, the grounds, were trodden and waste.
The portal yawned, void.
The front was, as I had once seen it in a dream, but a shell-like
wall, very high and very fragile-looking, perforated with painless
windows.
No roof, no battlements, no chimneys, all had crashed in.
And there was the silence of death about it.
The solitude of a lonesome wild.
No wonder that letters addressed to people here had never received
an answer, as well despatch epistles to a vault in a church-isle.
The grim blackness of the stones told by what fate the hall had
fallen, by conflagration.
But how kindled?
What story belonged to this disaster?
What loss, besides mortar and marble and woodwork, had followed
upon it, had life been wrecked?
As well as property?
If so, whose?
Dreadful question.
There was no one here to answer it.
Not even dumb sign, mute token.
In wandering round the shattered walls and through the devastated
interior, I gathered evidence that the calamity was not of late
occurrence.
Winter snows, I thought, had drifted through that void arch.
Winter rains had beaten in at those hollow casements.
For, amidst the drenched piles of rubbish, spring had cherished
vegetation.
Grass and wheat grew here and there between the stones and fallen
rafters.
And, oh, where meantime was the hapless owner of this wreck?
In what land?
Under what auspices?
My eye involuntarily wandered to the gray church tower near the
gates, and I asked, Is he with Damer de Rochester, sharing the
shelter of his narrow marble house?
Some answer must be had to these questions.
I could find it nowhere but at the inn, and thither ere long I
returned.
The host himself brought my breakfast into the parlor.
I requested him to shut the door and sit down.
I had some questions to ask him.
But when he complied, I scarcely knew how to begin.
Such horror had I of the possible answers.
And yet the spectacle of desolation I had just left
prepared me in a measure for a tale of misery.
The host was a respectable-looking middle-aged man.
You know Thornfield Hall, of course, I managed to say at last.
Yes, ma'am, I lived there once.
Did you?
Not in my time, I thought.
You were a stranger to me.
I was the late Mr. Rochester's butler, he added.
The late I seem to have received with full force the blow I had
been trying to evade.
The late, I gasped.
Is he dead?
I mean the present gentleman, Mr. Edward's father, he explained.
I breathed again.
My blood resumed its flow, fully assured by these words that Mr.
Edward, my Mr. Rochester, God bless him wherever he was, was at
least alive, was in short the present gentleman.
Gladdening words, it seemed I could hear all that was to come,
whatever the disclosures might be, with comparative tranquillity.
Since he was not in the grave, I could bear, I thought, to learn
that he was at the Antipodes.
Is Mr. Rochester living at Thornfield now, I asked, knowing, of
course, what the answer would be, but yet desirous of deferring the
direct question as to where he really was.
No, ma'am, oh, no, no one is living there.
I suppose you are a stranger in these parts, or you would have
heard what happened last autumn.
Thornfield Hall is quite a ruin.
It was burnt down just about harvest time.
A dreadful calamity.
Such an immense quantity of valuable property destroyed.
Hardly any of the furniture could be saved.
The fire broke out at dead of night, and, before the engines
arrived from Millcote, the building was one mass of flame.
It was a terrible spectacle.
I witnessed it myself.
At dead of night, I muttered.
Yes, that was ever the hour of fatality at Thornfield.
Was it known how it originated, I demanded?
They guessed, ma'am, they guessed.
Indeed, I should say it was ascertained beyond a doubt.
You are not perhaps aware, he continued, edging his chair a
little nearer the table, and speaking low, that there was a
lady, a lunatic, kept in the house.
I have heard something of it.
She was kept in very close confinement, ma'am.
People, even for years, was not absolutely certain of her
existence.
No one saw her.
They only knew by rumour that such a person was at the hall.
And who or what she was, it was difficult to conjecture.
They said Mr. Edward had brought her from abroad, and some
believed she had been his mistress.
But a queer thing happened a year since, a very queer thing.
I feared now to hear my own story.
I endeavoured to recall him to the main fact.
And this lady?
This lady, ma'am, he answered, turned out to be Mr.
Rochester's wife.
The discovery was brought about in the strangest way.
There was a young lady, a governess at the hall, that Mr.
Rochester fell in but the fire, I suggested.
I'm coming to that, ma'am, that Mr.
Edward fell in love with.
The servants say they never saw anybody so much in love as he
was, he was after her continually.
They used to watch him, servants will, you know, ma'am, and he
set store in her past everything, for all.
Nobody but him thought her so very handsome.
She was a little, small thing, they say, almost like a child.
I never saw her myself, but I've heard Leah the housemaid tell
of her.
Leah liked her well enough.
Mr. Rochester was about forty, and this governess not twenty.
And you see, when gentlemen of his age fall in love with girls,
they are often like as if they were bewitched.
Well, he would marry her.
You shall tell me this part of the story another time, I said, but
now I have a particular reason for wishing to hear all about the
fire.
Was it suspected that this lunatic, Mrs.
Rochester, had any hand in it?
You've hit it, ma'am.
It's quite certain that it was her and nobody but her that set it
going.
She had a woman to take care of her called Mrs.
Poole, an able woman in her line and very trustworthy, but for one
fault, a fault common to a deal of them nurses and matrons.
She kept a private bottle of gin by her, and now and then took a
drop over much.
It is excusable, for she had a hard life of it, but still it was
dangerous.
For when Mrs. Poole was fast asleep, after the gin and water,
the mad lady, who was as cunning as a witch, would take the keys
out of her pocket, let herself out of her chamber, and go roaming
about the house, doing any wild mischief that came into her head.
They say she had nearly burnt her husband in his bed once, but I
don't know about that.
However, on this night, she set fire first to the hangings of the
room next to her own, and then she got down to a lower story and
made her way to the chamber that had been the governess's.
She was like as if she knew somehow how matters had gone on, and
had a spite at her, and she kindled the bed there, but there was
nobody sleeping in it, fortunately.
The governess had run away two months before, and for all Mr.
Rochester sought her as if she had been the most precious thing he
had in the world, he never could hear a word of her, and he grew
savage, quite savage on his disappointment.
He never was a wild man, but he got dangerous after he lost her.
He would be alone, too.
He sent Mrs. Fairfax, the housekeeper, away to her friends at a
distance, but he did it handsomely, for he settled an annuity on her
for life, and she deserved it.
She was a very good woman.
Miss Adele, a ward he had, was put to school.
He broke off acquaintance with all the gentry, and shut himself up,
like a hermit, at the hall.
What?
He did not leave England?
Leave England?
Bless you!
No!
He would not cross the door-stones of the house except at night, when
walked just like a ghost about the grounds, and in the orchard as if he had
lost his senses, which it is my opinion he had.
For a more spirited, bolder, keener gentleman than he was before that
midge of a governess crossed him, you never saw, ma'am.
He was not a man given to wine, or cards, or racing, as some are, and he
was not so very handsome, but he had a courage and a will of his own, if
ever man had.
I knew him from a boy, you see, and for my part, I have often wished
that Miss Eyre had been sunk in the sea before she came to Thornfield
Hall.
Then Mr. Rochester was at home when the fire broke out?
Yes, indeed was he, and he went up to the attics, when all was burning
above and below, and got the servants out of their beds, and helped them
down himself.
Anne went back to get his mad wife out of her cell, and then they called
out to him that she was on the roof, where she was standing, waving her
arms above the battlements, and shouting out till they could hear her a
mile off.
I saw her and heard her with my own eyes.
She was a big woman, and had long black hair.
We could see it streaming against the flames as she stood.
I witnessed, and several more witnessed Mr. Rochester ascend through the
skylight onto the roof.
We heard him call, Bertha.
We saw him approach her, and then ma'am, she yelled and gave a spring, and
the next minute she lay smashed on the pavement.
Dead?
I, dead as the stones on which her brains and blood were scattered.
Good God!
You may well say so, ma'am.
It was frightful.
He shuddered.
And afterwards?
I urged.
Well, ma'am, afterwards the house was burnt to the ground.
There are only some bits of wall standing now.
Were any other lives lost?
No.
Perhaps it would have been better if there had.
What do you mean?
Poor Mr. Edward, he ejaculated.
I little thought ever to have seen it.
Some say it was a just judgment on him for keeping his first marriage
secret, and wanting to take another wife while he had one living.
But I pity him for my part.
You said he was alive, I exclaimed.
Yes, yes, he is alive, but many think he had better be dead.
Why, how?
My blood was again running cold.
Where is he?
I demanded.
Is he in England?
Aye, aye, he's in England.
He can't get out of England, I fancy.
He's a fixture now.
What agony was this?
And the man seemed resolved to protract it.
He is stone blind, he said at last.
Yes, he is stone blind, is Mr. Edward.
I had dreaded worse.
I had dreaded he was mad.
I summoned strength to ask what had caused this calamity.
It was all his own courage, and a body may say his kindness in a way, ma'am.
He wouldn't leave the house till everyone else was out before him.
As he came down the great staircase at last, after Mrs.
Rochester had flung herself from the battlements, there was a great crash.
All fell.
He was taken out from under the ruins, alive, but sadly hurt.
A beam had fallen in such a way as to protect him partly, but one eye was
knocked out, and one hand so crushed that Mr. Carter, the surgeon, had to
amputate it directly.
The other eye inflamed.
He lost the sight of that also.
He is now helpless, indeed blind and a cripple.
Where is he?
Where does he now live?
At Ferndean, a manor house on a farm he has, about thirty miles off.
Quite a desolate spot.
Who is with him?
Old John and his wife.
He would have none else.
He is quite broken down, they say.
Have you any sort of conveyance?
We have a chaise, ma'am, a very handsome chaise.
Let it be got ready instantly.
And if your post-boy can drive me to Ferndean before dark this day, I'll
pay both you and him twice the hire you usually demand.
XXXVII.
The manor house of Ferndean was a building of considerable antiquity, moderate size,
and no architectural pretensions, deep buried in a wood.
I had heard of it before.
Mr. Rochester often spoke of it, and sometimes went there.
His father had purchased the estate for the sake of the game-covers.
He would have let the house, but could find no tenant in consequence of its ineligible
and insolubrious site.
Ferndean then remained uninhabited and unfurnished, with the exception of some two or three rooms
fitted up for the accommodation of the squire, when he went there in the season to shoot.
To this house I came, just air dark, on an evening marked by the characteristics of sad
sky, cold gale, and continued small penetrating rain.
The last mile I performed on foot, having dismissed the chaise and driver with the double
remuneration I had promised.
Even when within a very short distance of the manor house you could see nothing of it,
so thick and dark grew the timber of the gloomy wood about it.
Iron gates between granite pillars showed me where to enter, and passing through them
I found myself at once in the twilight of close-ranked trees.
There was a grass-grown track descending the forest aisle, between whore and knotty shafts
and under-branched arches.
I followed it, expecting soon to reach the dwelling, but it stretched on and on.
It wound far and farther.
No sign of habitation or grounds was visible.
I thought I had taken a wrong direction and lost my way.
The darkness of natural, as well as of sylvan desk, gathered over me.
I looked round in search of another road.
There was none.
All was interwoven stem, columnar trunk, dense summer foliage, no opening anywhere.
I proceeded.
At last my way opened.
The trees thinned a little.
Presently I beheld a railing, then the house, scarce by this dim light distinguishable from
the trees, so dank and green were its decaying walls.
Entering a portal fastened only by a latch, I stood amidst a space of enclosed ground,
from which the wood swept away in a semicircle.
There were no flowers, no garden beds, only a broad gravel walk girdling a grass-plot,
and this set in the heavy frame of the forest.
The house presented two pointed gables in its front.
The windows were lattice to narrow.
The front door was narrow, too.
One step led up to it.
The whole looked, as the host of Rochester Arms had said, quite a desolate spot.
It was as still as a church on a weekday.
The pattering rain on the forest leaves was the only sound audible in its vicinage.
Can there be life here?
I asked.
Yes, life of some kind there was, for I heard a movement.
That narrow front door was unclosing, and some shape was about to issue from the grange.
It opened slowly.
A figure came out into the twilight and stood on the step, a man without a hat.
He stretched forth his hand, as if to feel whether it rained.
Dusk as it was, I had recognized him.
It was my master, Edward Fairfax Rochester, and no other.
I stayed my step, almost my breath, and stood to watch him, to examine him, myself unseen,
and, alas, to him invisible.
It was a sudden meeting, and one in which rapture was kept well in check by pain.
I had no difficulty in restraining my voice from exclamation, my step from hasty advance.
His form was of the same strong and stalwart contour as ever.
His port was still erect, his hair was still raven-black, nor were his features altered
or sunk.
Not in one year's space, by any sorrow, could his athletic strength be quelled, or his vigorous
prime blighted.
But in his countenance I saw a change.
That looked desperate and brooding.
That reminded me of some wronged and fettered wild beast or bird, dangerous to approach
in his sullen woe.
The caged eagle, whose gold-ringed eyes cruelty has extinguished, might look as looked that
sightless Samson.
And Reader, you think I feared him in his blind ferocity?
If you do, you little know me.
A soft hope blent with my sorrow that soon I should dare to drop a kiss on that brow
of rock, and on those lips so sternly sealed beneath it.
But not yet.
I would not accost him yet.
He descended the one step, and advanced slowly and gropingly towards the grass-plat.
Where was his daring stride now?
Then he paused, as if he knew not which way to turn.
He lifted his hand, and opened his eyelids, gazed blank, and, with a straining effort,
on the sky, and towards the amphitheatre of trees.
One saw that all to him was a void darkness.
He stretched his right hand, the left arm, the mutilated one, he kept hidden in his bosom.
He seemed to wish, by touch, to gain an idea of what lay around him.
He met but vacancy still, for the trees were some yards off where he stood.
He relinquished the endeavour, folded his arms, and stood quiet and mute in the rain,
now falling fast on his uncovered head.
At this moment John approached him from some quarter.
Will you take my arm, sir?
He said.
There is a heavy shower coming on.
Had you not better go in?
Let me alone, was the answer.
John withdrew, without having observed me.
Mr. Rochester now tried to walk about, vainly, all was too uncertain.
He groped his way back to the house, and, re-entering it, closed the door.
I now drew near and knocked.
John's wife opened the door for me.
Mary, I said, how are you?
She started as if she had seen a ghost.
I calmed her.
To her hurried.
Is it really you, Miss, come at this late hour to this lonely place?
I answered by taking her hand, and then I followed her into the kitchen, where John
now sat by a good fire.
I explained to them, in a few words, that I had heard all which had happened since I
left Thornfield, and that I was come to see Mr. Rochester.
I asked John to go down to the Turnpike house, where I had dismissed the chaise, and bring
my trunk which I had left there, and then, while I removed my bonnet and shawl, I questioned
Mary as to whether I could be accommodated at the manor house for the night, and finding
that arrangements to that effect, though difficult, would not be impossible, I informed
her I should stay.
Just at this moment the parlour bell rang.
When you go in, said I, tell your master that a person wishes to speak to him, but do not
give my name.
I don't think he will see you, she answered.
He refuses everybody.
When she returned, I inquired what he had said.
You are to send in your name and your business, she replied.
She then proceeded to fill a glass with water, and place it on a tray, together with candles.
Is that what he rang for?
I asked.
Yes, he always has candles brought in at dark, though he is blind.
Give the tray to me, I will carry it in.
I took it from her hand.
She pointed me out the parlour door.
The tray shook as I held it.
The water spilt from the glass.
My heart struck my ribs loud and fast.
Mary opened the door for me and shut it behind me.
This parlour looked gloomy.
A neglected handful of fire burnt low in the grate, and leaning over it with his head supported
against the high, old-fashioned mantelpiece, appeared the blind tenant of the room.
His old dog, Pilot, lay on one side, removed out of the way, and coiled up as if afraid
of being inadvertently trodden upon.
Pilot pricked up his ears when I came in.
Then he jumped up with a yelp and a whine, and he bounded towards me.
He almost knocked the tray from my hands.
I set it on the table, then patted him, and said softly, Lie down.
Mr. Rochester turned mechanically to see what the commotion was, but as he saw nothing,
he returned and sighed.
Give me the water, Mary, he said.
I approached him with the now only half-filled glass.
Pilot followed me, still excited.
What is the matter?
he inquired.
Down, Pilot, I again said.
He checked the water on its way to his lips and seemed to listen.
He drank and put the glass down.
This is you, Mary, is it not?
Mary's in the kitchen, I answered.
He put out his hand with a quick gesture, but not seeing where I stood, he did not touch
me.
Who is this?
Who is this? he demanded, trying, as it seemed, to see with those sightless eyes, an availing
and distressing attempt.
Answer me.
Speak again, he ordered, imperiously and aloud.
Will you have a little more water, sir?
I spilt half of what was in the glass, I said.
Who is it?
What is it?
Who speaks?
Pilot knows me, and John and Mary know I am here.
I came only this evening, I answered.
Great God, what delusion has come over me!
What sweet madness has seized me!
No delusion, no madness.
Your mind, sir, is too strong for delusion, your health too sound for frenzy.
And where is the speaker?
Is it only a voice?
Oh, I cannot see, but I must feel, or my heart will stop and my brain burst.
Whatever, whoever you are, be perceptible to the touch, or I cannot live.
He groped.
I arrested his wandering hand and prisoned it in both mine.
Her very fingers, he cried, her small, slight fingers.
If so, there must be more of her.
The muscular hand broke from my custody.
My arm was seized, my shoulder, neck, waist, I was entwined and gathered to him.
Is it Jane?
What is it?
This is her shape, this is her size.
And this is her voice, I added.
She is all here, her heart too.
God bless you, sir.
I am glad to be so near you again.
Jane Eyre, Jane Eyre, was all he said.
My dear master, I answered, I am Jane Eyre.
I have found you out.
I am come back to you.
In truth, in the flesh, my living Jane?
You touch me, sir, you hold me, and fast enough.
I am not like a corpse, nor vacant like Eyre, am I?
My living darling, these are certainly her limbs, and these her features.
But I cannot be so blessed, after all my misery.
It is a dream, such dreams as I have had at night when I have clasped her once more to
my heart as I do now, and kissed her as thus, and felt that she loved me and trusted that
she would not leave me.
Which I never will, sir, from this day.
Never will, says the vision.
But I always woke and found it an empty mockery, and I was desolate and abandoned, my life
dark, lonely, hopeless, my soul a thirst and forbidden to drink, my heart famished and
never to be fed.
Gentle soft dream nestling in my arms now, you will fly too, as your sisters have all
fled before you, but kiss me before you go.
Embrace me, Jane.
There, sir, and there.
I pressed my lips to his once brilliant and now rayless eyes.
I swept his hair from his brow and kissed that, too.
He suddenly seemed to arouse himself.
The conviction of the reality of all this seized him.
Is it you?
Is it, Jane?
You are come back to me, then?
I am.
And you do not lie dead in some ditch under some stream, and you are not a pining outcast
among strangers?
No, sir, I am an independent woman now.
Independent?
What do you mean, Jane?
My uncle in Madeira is dead, and he left me five thousand pounds.
Ah, this is practical, this is real, he cried.
I should never dream that.
Besides, there is that peculiar voice of hers, so animating and piquant, as well as soft.
It cheers my withered heart, it puts life into it.
What, Janet, are you an independent woman, a rich woman?
Quite rich, sir.
If you won't let me live with you, I can build a house of my own, close up to your door,
and you may come and sit in my parlour when you want company of an evening.
But, as you are rich, Jane, you have now, no doubt, friends who will look after you,
and not suffer you to devote yourself to a blind lame-der like me?
I told you I am independent, sir, as well as rich.
I am my own mistress.
And you will stay with me?
Certainly, unless you object.
I will be your neighbour, your nurse, your housekeeper.
I find you lonely.
I will be your companion, to read to you, to walk with you, to sit with you, to wait
on you, to be eyes and hands to you.
Cease to look so melancholy, my dear master.
You shall not be left desolate so long as I live.
He replied not.
He seemed serious, abstracted.
He sighed.
He half opened his lips as if to speak.
He closed them again.
I felt a little embarrassed.
Perhaps I had too rashly overlapped conventionalities, and he, like St. John, saw impropriety in
my inconsiderateness.
I had indeed made my proposal from the idea that he wished, and would ask me to be his
wife.
An expectation, not the less certain because unexpressed, had buoyed me up, that he would
claim me at once as his own.
But no hint to that effect escaping him, and his countenance becoming more overcast, I
suddenly remembered that I might have been all wrong, and was perhaps playing the fool
unwittingly, and I began gently to withdraw myself from his arms, but he eagerly snatched
me closer.
No, no, Jane, you must not go.
No, I have touched you, heard you, felt the comfort of your presence, the sweetness of
your consolation.
I cannot give up these joys.
I have little left in myself.
I must have you.
The world may laugh, may call me absurd, selfish, but it does not signify.
My very soul demands you.
It will be satisfied, or it will take deadly vengeance on its frame.
Well, sir, I will stay with you.
I have said so.
Yes, but you understand one thing by staying with me, and I understand another.
You perhaps could make up your mind to be about my hand and chair, to wait on me as
a kind little nurse, for you have an affectionate heart and a generous spirit which prompt you
to make sacrifices for those you pity, and that ought to suffice for me, no doubt.
I suppose I should now entertain none but fatherly feelings for you.
Do you think so?
Come, tell me.
I will think what you like, sir.
I am content to be only your nurse, if you think it better.
But you cannot always be my nurse, Janet.
You are young.
You must marry one day.
I don't care about being married.
You should care, Janet.
If I were what I once was, I would try to make you care, but a sightless block."
He relapsed again into gloom.
I, on the contrary, became more cheerful, and took fresh courage.
These last words gave me an insight as to where the difficulty lay, and as it was no
difficulty with me, I felt quite relieved from my previous embarrassment.
I resumed a livelier vein of conversation.
"'It is time some one undertook to rehumanize you,' said I, parting his thick and long uncut
locks, for I see you are being metamorphosed into a lion, or something of that sort.
You have a faux air of Nebuchadnezzar in the fields about you.
That is certain.
Your hair reminds me of eagle's feathers.
Whether your nails are grown like bird's claws or not, I have not yet noticed.
On this arm I have neither hand nor nails,' he said, drawing the mutilated limb from his
breast and showing it to me.
"'It is a mere stump, a ghastly sight.
Don't you think so, Jane?'
"'It is a pity to see it, and a pity to see your eyes, and the scar of fire on your forehead,
and the worst of it is, one is in danger of loving you too well for all this and making
too much of you.'
"'I thought you would be revolted, Jane, when you saw my arm and my sickitized vision.'
"'Did you?
Don't tell me so, lest I should say something disparaging to your judgment.
Now let me leave you an instant to make a better fire and have the hearth swept up.
Can you tell when there is a good fire?'
"'Yes, with the right eye I see a glow, a ruddy haze.
And you see the candles?
Very dimly, each is a luminous cloud.
Can you see me?'
"'No, my fairy, but I am only too thankful to hear and feel you.
When do you take supper?'
"'I never take supper.'
"'But you shall have some to-night.
I am hungry.
So are you, I dare say.
Only you forget.'
"'Summoning Mary, I soon had the room in more cheerful order.
I prepared him likewise a comfortable repast.
My spirits were excited, and with pleasure and ease I talked to him during supper and
for a long time after.
There was no harassing restraint, no repressing of glee and vivacity with him, for with him
I was at perfect ease because I knew I suited him.
All I said or did seemed either to console or revive him.
Delightful consciousness!
It brought to life and light my whole nature.
In his presence I thoroughly lived, and he lived in mine.
Blind as he was, smiles played over his face, joy dawned on his forehead, his liniments
softened and warmed.
After supper he began to ask me many questions of where I had been, what I had been doing,
how I had found him out, but I gave him only very partial replies.
It was too late to enter into particulars that night.
Besides, I wished to touch no deep thrilling chord, to open no fresh well of emotion in
his heart.
My sole present aim was to cheer him, cheered as I have said he was, and yet but by fits.
If a moment's silence broke the conversation, he would turn restless, touch me, then say,
Jane.
You are altogether a human being, Jane, you are certain of that.
I conscientiously believe so, Mr. Rochester.
Yet how on this dark and doleful evening could you so suddenly rise on my lone hearth?
I stretched my hand to take a glass of water from a hireling, and it was given me by you.
I asked a question, expecting John's wife to answer me, and your voice spoke at my ear.
Because I had come in in Mary's stead with the tray, and there is enchantment in the
Who can tell what a dark, dreary, hopeless life I have dragged on for months past?
Doing nothing, expecting nothing, merging night and day, feeling but the sensation of
cold when I let the fire go out, of hunger when I forgot to eat, and then a ceaseless
sorrow, and at times a very delirium of desire to hold my Jane again.
Yes, for her restoration I longed, far more than for that of my lost sight.
How can it be that Jane is with me, and says she loves me?
Will she not depart as suddenly as she came?
To-morrow I fear I shall find her no more.
A commonplace practical reply, out of the train of his own disturbed ideas, was, I was sure,
the best and most reassuring for him in this frame of mind.
I passed my finger over his eyebrows, and remarked that they were scorched,
and that I would apply something which should make them grow as broad and black as ever.
Where is the use of doing me good in any way, beneficent spirit,
when at some fatal moment you will again desert me, passing like a shadow, wither and how to
me unknown, and for me remaining afterwards undiscoverable?
Have you a pocket-comb about you, sir?
What for, Jane?
Just to comb out this shaggy black mane, I find you rather alarming when I examine you close at
hand. You talk of my being a fairy, but I am sure you are more like a brownie.
Am I hideous, Jane?
Very, sir. You always were, you know.
The wickedness has not yet been taken out of you wherever you have sojourned.
Yet I have been with good people, far better than you, a hundred times better people,
possessed of ideas and views you never entertained in your life,
quite more refined and exalted.
Who the deuce have you been with?
If you twist in that way, you will make me pull the hair out of your head,
and then I think you will cease to entertain doubts of my substantiality.
Who have you been with, Jane?
You shall not get it out of me to-night, sir. You must wait till to-morrow. To leave my tale
half-toed, will, you know, be a sort of security that I shall appear at your breakfast table to
finish it. By the by, I must mind not to rise on your hearth with only a glass of water, then,
I must bring an egg at the least, to say nothing of fried ham.
You mocking changeling, fairy born in human bread, you make me feel as I have not felt these
twelve months. If Saul could have had you for his David, the evil spirit would have been exercised
without the aid of the harp. There, sir, you are read up and made decent. Now I'll leave you.
I have been travelling these last three days, and I believe I am tired. Good night.
Just one word, Jane. Were there only ladies in the house where you have been?
I laughed and made my escape, still laughing as I ran upstairs.
A good idea, I thought with glee. I see I have the means of fretting him out
of his melancholy for some time to come. Very early the next morning, I heard him
up in a stir, wandering from one room to another. As soon as Mary came down, I heard the question,
Is Miss Eyre here? Then, which room did you put her into? Was it dry? Is she up? Go and ask if
she wants anything, and when she will come down. I came down as soon as I thought there was a
prospect of breakfast. Entering the room very softly, I had a view of him before he discovered
my presence. It was mournful, indeed, to witness the subjugation of that vigorous spirit to a
infirmity. He sat in his chair, still but not at rest, expectant, evidently, the lines of now
habitual sadness marking his strong features. His countenance reminded one of a lamp quenched,
waiting to be relit, and, alas, it was not himself that could now kindle the luster of
animated expression. He was dependent on another for that office. I had meant to be gay and careless,
but the powerlessness of the strong man touched my heart to the quick.
Still, I accosted him with what vivacity I could.
It is a bright sunny morning, sir, I said. The rain is over and gone, and there is a tender shining
after it. You shall have a walk soon. I had waken the glow. His features beamed.
Oh, you are indeed there, my Skylark. Come to me. You are not gone, not vanished. I heard one of
your kind an hour ago, singing high over the wood, but its song had no music for me, any more than
the rising sun had rays. All the melody on earth is concentrated in my Jane's tongue to my ear.
I am glad it is not naturally a silent one. All the sunshine I can feel is in her presence.
The water stood in my eyes to hear this avowal of his dependence, just as if a royal eagle,
chained to a perch, should be forced to entreat a sparrow to become its purveyor.
But I would not be lacrimose. I dashed off the salt drops and busied myself with preparing
breakfast. Most of the morning was spent in the open air. I led him out of the wet and wild wood
into some cheerful fields. I described to him how brilliantly green they were, how the flowers and
hedges looked refreshed, how sparklingly blue was the sky. I sought a seat for him in a hidden and
lovely spot, a dry stump of a tree, nor did I refuse to let him, when seated, place me on his knee.
Why should I, when both he and I were happier nearer than apart?
Pilot lay beside us, all was quiet. He broke out suddenly while clasping me in his arms.
Cruel, cruel deserter! O Jane, what did I feel when I discovered you had fled from Thornfield,
and when I could nowhere find you, and, after examining your apartment, ascertained you had
taken no money, nor anything which could serve as an equivalent? A pearl necklace I had given you lay
untouched in its little casket. Your trunks were left corded and locked as they had been prepared
for the bridal tour. What could my darling do, I asked, left destitute and penniless?
And what did she do? Let me hear now.
Thus urged, I began the narrative of my experience for the last year. I softened
considerably what related to the three days of wandering and starvation, because to have told
him all would have been to inflict unnecessary pain. The little I did say lacerated his faithful
heart deeper than I wished. I should not have left him thus, he said, without any means of making my
way. I should have told him my intention. I should have confided in him he would never have forced me
to be his mistress. Violent as he had seemed in his despair, he, in truth, loved me far too well
and too tenderly to constitute himself my tyrant. He would have given me half his fortune without
demanding so much as a kiss in return, rather than I should have flung myself friendless on the wide
world. I had endured, he was certain, more than I had confessed to him.
Well, whatever my sufferings had been, they were very short, I answered, and then I proceeded to
tell him how I had been received at Morehouse, how I had obtained the office of schoolmistress,
etc. The accession of fortune, the discovery of my relations, followed in due order. Of course,
St. John River's name came in frequently in the progress of my tale. When I had done, that name
was immediately taken up. This St. John, then, is your cousin? Yes. You have spoken of him often.
Did you like him? He was a very good man, sir. I could not help liking him. A good man? Does that
mean a respectable, well-conducted man of fifty? Or what does it mean? St. John was only twenty-nine,
sir.
Jean encore, as the French say. Is he a person of low stature, phlegmatic and plain,
a person whose goodness consists rather in his guiltlessness of vice than in his prowess and
virtue? He is untiringly active. Great and exalted deeds are what he lives to perform.
But his brain, that is probably rather soft, he means well, but you shrug your shoulders to
hear him talk. He talks little, sir. What he does say is ever to the point. His brain is first rate,
I should think not impressible, but vigorous. Is he an able man, then? Truly able. A thoroughly
educated man? St. John is an accomplished and profound scholar. His manners, I think you said,
not to your taste, priggish and parsonic. I never mentioned his manners, but unless I had a very bad
taste, they must suit it. They are polished, calm, and gentlemanlike. His appearance, I forget what
description you gave of his appearance. A sort of raw curate, half strangled with his white neck
cloth, and stilted up on his thick sole high-lows, eh? St. John dresses well. He is a handsome man,
tall, fair with blue eyes, and a Grecian profile. A side, damn him, to me. Did you like him, Jane?
Yes, Mr. Rochester, I liked him. But you asked me that before. I perceived, of course, the drift of
my interlocutor. Jealousy had got hold of him. She stung him. But the sting was salutary. It gave him
from the gnawing fang of melancholy. I would not, therefore, immediately charm the snake.
Perhaps you would rather not sit any longer on my knee, Miss Eyre, was the next somewhat
unexpected observation. Why not, Mr. Rochester? The picture you have just drawn is suggestive
of a rather too overwhelming contrast. Your words have delineated very prettily a graceful Apollo.
He is present to your imagination, tall, fair, blue-eyed, and with a Grecian profile. Your eyes
dwell on a Vulcan, a real blacksmith, brown, broad-shouldered, and blind and lame into the
bargain. I never thought of it before. But you certainly are rather like Vulcan, sir.
Well, you can leave me, ma'am, but before you go. And he retained me by a firmer grasp than ever.
You will be pleased just to answer me a question or two. He paused.
What questions, Mr. Rochester? Then followed this cross-examination.
St. John made you schoolmistress of Morton before he knew you were his cousin?
Yes. You would often see him? He would visit the school sometimes? Daily. He would approve of your
creature? He approved of them, yes. He would discover many things in you he could not have
expected to find. Some of your accomplishments are not ordinary. I don't know about that.
You had a little cottage near the school, you say. Did he ever come there to see you?
Now and then. Of an evening? Once or twice.
A pause. How long did you reside with him and his sisters after the cousinship was discovered?
Five months. Did Rivers spend much time with the ladies of his family?
Yes. The back parlor was both his study and ours. He sat near the window, and we by the table.
Did he study much? A good deal. What?
Hindostani. And what did you do mean time? I learned German at first. Did he teach you?
He did not understand German. Did he teach you nothing? A little Hindostani. Rivers taught you
Hindostani? Yes, sir. And his sisters also? No. Only you? Only me. Did you ask to learn?
No. He wished to teach you? Yes. A second pause. Why did he wish it? Of what use could Hindostani
be to you? He intended me to go with him to India. Ah, here I reached the root of the matter. He
wanted you to marry him. He asked me to marry him. That is a fiction, an impudent invention to vex me.
I beg your pardon. It is the literal truth. He asked me more than once,
and was as stiff about urging his point as ever you could be.
Miss Eyre, I repeat it. You can leave me. How often am I to say the same thing? Why do you remain
pertinaciously perched on my knee when I have given you notice to quit? Because I am comfortable
there. No, Jane, you are not comfortable there, because your heart is not with me. It is with
this cousin, this St. John. Oh, till this moment I thought my little Jane was all mine. I had a
belief she loved me even when she left me. That was an atom of sweet and much bitter.
Long as we have been parted, hot tears as I have wept over our separation, I never thought that
I was mourning her. She was loving another. But it is useless grieving. Jane, leave me. Go and marry
Rivers. Shake me off then, sir. Push me away, for I'll not leave you of my own accord. Jane,
I ever like your tone of voice. It still renews hope. It sounds so truthful. When I hear it,
it carries me back a year. I forget that you have formed a new tie. But I am not a fool. Go.
Where must I go, sir? Your own way with the husband you have chosen.
Who is that? You know this St. John Rivers. He is not my husband, nor ever will be.
He does not love me. I do not love him. He loves as he can love, and that is not as you love.
A beautiful young lady called Rosamond. He wanted to marry me only because he thought I should make
a suitable missionary's wife, which she would not have done. He is good and great, but severe,
and for me cold as an iceberg. He is not like you, sir. I am not happy at his side, nor near him,
nor with him. He has no indulgence for me, no fondness. He sees nothing attractive in me,
not even youth, only a few useful mental points. Then I must leave you, sir, to go to him?
I shuddered involuntarily and clung instinctively closer to my blind,
but beloved master. He smiled.
What, Jane? Is this true? Is such really the state of matters between you and Rivers?
Absolutely, sir. Oh, you need not be jealous. I wanted to tease you a little to make you less
sad. I thought anger would be better than grief. But if you wished me to love you,
could you but see how much I do love you, you would be proud and content.
All my heart is yours, sir. It belongs to you, and with you it would remain,
were fate to exile the rest of me from your presence for ever.
Again, as he kissed me, painful thoughts darkened his aspect.
My seared vision, my crippled strength, he murmured regretfully.
I caressed in order to soothe him. I knew of what he was thinking,
and wanted to speak for him, but dared not. As he turned aside his face a minute,
I saw a tear slide from under the sealed eyelid, and trickle down the manly cheek. My heart swelled.
I am no better than the old lightning-struck chestnut tree in Thornfield Orchard,
he remarked ere long. And what right would that ruin have
to bid a budding woodbine cover its decay with freshness?
You are no ruin, sir, no lightning-struck tree. You are green and vigorous. Plants will grow
about your roots whether you ask them or not, because they take delight in your bountiful
shadow. And as they grow, they will lean towards you, and wind round you,
because your strength offers them so safe a prop. Again he smiled. I gave him comfort.
You speak of friends, Jane? He asked.
Yes, of friends, I answered rather hesitatingly, for I knew I meant more than friends,
but could not tell what other word to employ. He helped me.
Ah, Jane, but I want a wife.
Do you, sir?
Yes. Is it news to you?
Of course. You said nothing about it before.
Is it unwelcome news?
That depends on circumstances, sir. On your choice.
Which you shall make for me, Jane. I will abide by your decision.
Choose, then, sir, her who loves you best.
I will at least choose her I love best. Jane, will you marry me?
Yes, sir.
A poor blind man, whom you will have to lead about by the hand?
A crippled man, twenty years older than you, whom you will have to wait on?
Yes, sir.
Truly, Jane.
Most truly, sir.
Oh, my darling, God bless and reward you.
Mr. Rochester, if ever I did a good deed in my life, if ever I thought a good thought,
if ever I prayed a sincere and blameless prayer, if ever I wished a righteous wish,
I am rewarded now. To be your wife is, for me, to be as happy as I can be on earth.
Because you delight in sacrifice.
Sacrifice? What do I sacrifice? Famine for food, expectation for content?
To be privileged to put my arms round what I value, to press my lips to what I love,
to repose on what I trust, is that to make a sacrifice? If so, then certainly I delight in
sacrifice. And to bear with my infirmities, Jane, to overlook my deficiencies.
Which are none, sir, to me. I love you better now, when I can be really useful to you,
than I did in your state of proud independence, when you disdained every part but that of the
giver and protector. Hitherto I have hated to be helped, to be led. Henceforth I feel I shall
hate it no more. I did not like to put my hand into a hireling's, but it is pleasant to feel
it circled by Jane's little fingers. I preferred utter loneliness to the constant attendance of
servants. But Jane's soft ministry will be a perpetual joy. Jane suits me. Do I suit her?
To the finest fiber of my nature, sir. The case being so, we have nothing in the world to wait for.
We must be married instantly. He looked and spoke with eagerness. His old impetuosity was rising.
We must become one flesh without any delay, Jane. There is but the license to get. Then we marry.
Mr. Rochester, I have just discovered the sun has far declined from its meridian,
and Pilate has actually gone home to his dinner. Let me look at your watch.
Fasten it into your girdle, Janet, and keep it henceforward. I have no use for it.
It is nearly four o'clock in the afternoon, sir. Don't you feel hungry?
The third day from this must be our wedding day, Jane. Never mind fine clothes and jewels now.
All that is not worth a filip. The sun has dried up all the raindrops, sir. The breeze is still.
It is quite hot. Do you know, Jane, I have your little pearl necklace at this moment
fastened round my bronze scrag under my cravat? I have worn it since the day I lost my only treasure,
as a memento of her. We will go home through the wood. That will be the shadiest way.
He pursued his own thoughts without heeding me.
Jane, you think me, I dare say, an irreligious dog, but my heart swells with gratitude to the
man. He sees not as man sees, but far clearer. Judges not as man judges, but far more wisely.
I did wrong. I would have sullied my innocent flower. Breathe guilt on its purity. The
omnipotent snatched it from me. I, in my stiff-necked rebellion, almost cursed the dispensation.
Instead of bending to the decree, I defied it. Divine justice pursued its course.
Disasters came thick on me. I was forced to pass through the valley of the shadow of death.
His chastisements are mighty, and one smote me which has humbled me forever. You know I was proud
of my strength, but what is it now when I must give it over to foreign guidance as a child does
its weakness? Of late, Jane, only, only of late, I began to see and acknowledge the hand of God in
my doom. I began to experience remorse, repentance, the wish for reconcilement to my Maker. I began
sometimes to pray. Very brief prayers they were, but very sincere. Some days since—nay, I can
number them—four. It was last Monday night. A singular mood came over me, one in which grief
replaced frenzy, sorrow sullenness. I had long had the impression that since I could nowhere
find you, you must be dead. Late that night, perhaps it might be between eleven and twelve o'clock,
ere I retired to my dreary rest, I supplicated God that, if it seemed good to him, I might soon
be taken from this life, and admitted to that world to come, where there was still hope of rejoining
Jane. I was in my own room, and sitting by the window, which was open, it soothed me to feel the
balmy night air, though I could see no stars, and only by a vague luminous haze knew the presence
of a moon. I longed for thee, Janet. Oh, I longed for thee both with soul and flesh. I asked of God
at once in anguish and humility if I had not been long enough desolate, afflicted, tormented.
And might not soon taste bliss and peace once more. That I merited all I endured, I acknowledged.
That I could scarcely endure more, I pleaded, and the alpha and omega of my heart's wishes
broken voluntarily from my lips in the words, Jane, Jane, Jane. Did you speak these words aloud?
I did, Jane. If any listener had heard me, he would have thought me mad. I pronounced them with such
frantic energy. And it was last Monday night? Somewhere near midnight? Yes, but the time is of
no consequence. What followed is the strange point. You will think me superstitious. Some
superstition I have in my blood, and always had. Nevertheless, this is true. True, at least, it is
that I heard what I now relate. As I exclaimed, Jane, Jane, Jane, a voice, I cannot tell whence
the voice came, but I know whose voice it was, replied, I am coming. Wait for me. And a moment
after went whispering on the wind the words, Where are you? I'll tell you, if I can, the idea,
the pictures these words open to my mind, yet it is difficult to express what I want to express.
Verndene is buried, as you see, in a heavy wood where sound falls dull and dies unreverberating.
Where are you? seemed spoken amongst mountains, for I heard a hill-sun echo repeat the words.
Cooler and fresher at the moment the gales seemed to visit my brow.
I could have deemed that in some wild, lone scene I and Jane were meeting. In spirit,
I believe we must have met. You no doubt were at that hour in unconscious sleep, Jane.
Perhaps your soul wandered from its cell to comfort mine,
for those were your accents, as certain as I lived they were yours.
Reader, it was on Monday night, near midnight, that I too had received the mysterious summons.
Those were the very words by which I replied to it. I listened to Mr. Rochester's narrative,
but made no disclosure in return. The coincidence struck me as too awful and inexplicable to be
communicated or discussed. If I told anything, my tale would be such as must necessarily make
a profound impression on the mind of my hearer. And that mind, yet from its sufferings too prone
to gloom, needed not the deeper shade of the supernatural. I kept these things then,
and pondered them in my heart. You cannot now wonder, continued my master,
that when you rose upon me so unexpectedly last night, I had difficulty in believing you any
other than a mere voice and vision, something that would melt to silence and annihilation,
as the midnight whisper and mountain echo had melted before. Now I thank God,
I knew it to be otherwise. Yes, I thank God. He put me off his knee, rose, and reverently lifting
his hat from his brow, and bending his sightless eyes to the earth, he stood in mute devotion.
Only the last words of the worship were audible. I thank my Maker, that in the midst of judgment
he has remembered mercy. I humbly entreat my Redeemer to give me strength to lead henceforth
a purer life than I have done hitherto. Then he stretched his hand out to be led. I took
that dear hand, held it a moment to my lips, then let it pass round my shoulder. Being so much
lower of stature than he, I served both for his prop and guide. We entered the wood and wended
homeward.
I married him.
A quiet wedding we had, he and I, the parson and clerk, were alone present.
When we got back from church, I went into the kitchen of the manor house, where Mary
was cooking the dinner, and John cleaning the knives, and I said,
Mary, I have been married to Mr. Rochester this morning.
The housekeeper and her husband were both of that decent phlegmatic order of people,
to whom one may at any time safely communicate a remarkable piece of news without incurring
the danger of having one's ears pierced by some shrill ejaculation, and subsequently
stunned by a torrent of wordy wonderment.
Mary did look up, and she did stare at me.
The ladle with which she was basting a pair of chickens roasting at the fire did for some
three minutes hang suspended in the air, and for the same space of time John's knives also
had a rest from the polishing process.
But Mary, bending again over the roast, said only,
Have you, Miss? Well, for sure.
A short time after she pursued,
I see to go out with the master, but I didn't know you were going to church to be wed, and
she basted away.
John, when I turned to him, was grinning from ear to ear.
I told Mary how it would be, he said.
I knew what Mr. Edward—John was an old servant, and had known his master when he was the cadet
of the house, therefore he often gave him his Christian name.
I knew what Mr. Edward would do, and I was certain he would not wait long neither, and
he's done right, for aught I know.
I wish you joy, Miss.
And he politely pulled his forelock.
Thank you, John.
Mr. Rochester told me to give you and Mary this.
I put into his hand a five-pound note.
Without waiting to hear more, I left the kitchen, and passing the door of that sanctum some
time after, I caught the words,
She'll happen do better for him, nor any at the grand ladies.
And again, if she beant one of the handsomest, she's known foul and very good-natured, and
in his eye she's fair beautiful, any body may see that.
I wrote to Morehouse, and to Cambridge immediately, to say what I had done, fully explaining also
why I had thus acted.
Diana and Mary approved this step unreservedly.
Diana announced that she would just give me time to get over the honeymoon, and then she
would come and see me.
She had better not wait till then, Jane, said Mr. Rochester, when I read her letter to him.
If she does, she will be too late, for our honeymoon will shine our life long.
Its beams will only fade over your grave or mine.
How St. John received the news, I don't know.
He never answered the letter in which I communicated it, yet six months after he wrote to me.
Without, however, mentioning Mr. Rochester's name, or alluding to my marriage.
His letter was then calm, and, though very serious, kind.
He has maintained a regular, though not frequent, correspondence ever since.
He hopes I am happy, and trusts I am not one of those who live without God in the world,
and only mind earthly things.
You have not quite forgotten little Adele, have you, reader?
I had not.
I soon asked, and obtained leave of Mr. Rochester, to go and see her at the school where he had
placed her.
Her frantic joy at beholding me again moved me much.
She looked pale and thin.
She said she was not happy.
I found the rules of the establishment were too strict, its course of study too severe
for a child of her age.
I took her home with me.
I meant to become her governess once more, but I soon found this impracticable.
My time and cares were now required by another.
My husband needed them all.
So I sought out a school conducted on a more indulgent system, and near enough to permit
of my visiting her often, and bringing her home sometimes.
I took care she should never want for anything that could contribute to her comfort.
She soon settled in her new abode, became very happy there, and made fair progress in
her studies.
As she grew up a sound English education corrected in a great measure her French defects, and
when she left school I found in her a pleasing and obliging companion, docile, good-tempered,
and well principled.
By her grateful attention to me and mine she has long since well repaid any little kindness
I ever had it in my power to offer her.
My tale draws to its close.
One word respecting my experience of married life, and one brief glance at the fortunes
of those whose names have most frequently recurred in this narrative, and I have done.
I have now been married ten years.
I know what it is to live entirely for and with what I love best on earth.
I hold myself supremely blessed, blessed beyond what language can express, because I am my
husband's life as fully as he is mine.
No woman was ever nearer to her mate than I am, ever more absolutely bone of his bone
and flesh of his flesh.
I know no weariness of my Edward society.
He knows none of mine, any more than we each do of the pulsation of the heart that beats
in our separate bosoms.
Consequently, we are ever together.
To be together is for us to be at once as free as in solitude, as gay as in company.
We talk, I believe, all day long.
To talk to each other is but a more animated and an audible thinking.
All my confidence is bestowed on him.
All his confidence is devoted to me.
We are precisely suited in character.
Perfect concord is the result.
Mr. Rochester continued blind for the first two years of our union.
Perhaps it was that circumstance that drew us so very near, that knit us so very close,
for I was then his vision, as I am still his right hand.
Literally, I was what he often called me the apple of his eye.
He saw nature, he saw books through me, and never did I weary of gazing for his behalf
and of putting into words the effect of field, tree, town, river, cloud, sunbeam, of the
landscape before us, of the weather around us, and impressing by sound on his ear what
light could no longer stamp on his eye.
Never did I weary of reading to him.
Never did I weary of conducting him where he wished to go, of doing for him what he
wished to be done.
And there was a pleasure in my services, most full, most exquisite, even though sad, because
he claimed these services without painful shame or damping humiliation.
He loved me so truly that he knew no reluctance in profiting by my attendance.
He felt that I loved him so fondly that to yield that attendance was to indulge my sweetest
wishes.
One morning at the end of the two years, as I was writing a letter to his dictation, he
came and bent over me and said,
Jane, have you a glittering ornament round your neck?
I had a gold watch chain.
I answered, yes.
And have you a pale blue dress on?
I had.
He informed me then that for some time he had fancied the obscurity clouding one eye
was becoming less dense, and that now he was sure of it.
He and I went up to London.
He had the advice of an eminent oculist, and he eventually recovered the sight of that
one eye.
He cannot now see very distinctly.
He cannot read or write much, but he can find his way without being led by the hand.
The sky is no longer a blank to him, the earth no longer a void.
When his firstborn was put into his arms, he could see that the boy had inherited his
own eyes as they once were, large, brilliant, and black.
On that occasion, he again, with a full heart, acknowledged that God had tempered judgment
with mercy.
My Edward and I then are happy, and the more so because those we most love are happy likewise.
Diana and Mary Rivers are both married.
Alternately, once every year, they come to see us, and we go to see them.
Diana's husband is a captain in the Navy, a gallant officer and a good man.
Mary's is a clergyman, a college friend of her brother's, and from his attainments and
principles worthy of the connection.
Both Captain Fitzjames and Mr. Wharton love their wives and are loved by them.
As to St. John Rivers, he left England.
He went to India.
He entered on the path he had marked for himself.
He pursues it still.
A more resolute, indefatigable pioneer never wrought amidst rocks and dangers.
Firm, faithful, and devoted, full of energy, and zeal, and truth, he labors for his race.
He clears their painful way to improvement.
He hews down, like a giant, the prejudices of creed and caste that encumber it.
He may be stern.
He may be exacting.
He may be ambitious yet, but his is the sternness of the warrior Great Heart, who guards his
pilgrim convoy from the onslaught of Apollyon.
His is the exaction of the apostle, who speaks but for Christ, when he says, Whosoever will
come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me.
His is the ambition of the high Master Spirit, which aims to fill a place in the first rank
of those who are redeemed from the earth, who stand without fault before the throne
of God, who share the last mighty victories of the Lamb, who are called, and chosen, and
faithful.
St. John is unmarried.
He never will marry now.
Himself has hitherto sufficed to the toil, and the toil draws near its close.
His glorious son hastens to its setting.
The last letter I received from him drew from my eyes human tears, and yet filled my heart
with divine joy.
He anticipated his sure reward, his incorruptible crown.
I know that a stranger's hand will write to me next, to say that the good and faithful
servant has been called at length into the joy of his Lord.
And why weep for this?
No fear of death will darken St. John's last hour.
His mind will be unclouded.
His heart will be undaunted.
His hope will be sure.
His faith steadfast.
His own words are a pledge of this.
My master, he says, has forewarned me.
Daily he announces more distinctly.
Surely I come quickly, and hourly I more eagerly respond.
Amen.
Even so come, Lord Jesus.